1 
The Speaker Pro Tem Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab in the Chair]
26.06.2024 7 MEMBERS SWORN – Contd. 
[English] 
HON. SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Secretary-General will now call  the names of the hon. Members who have not taken oath or affirmation. SECRETARY-GENERAL:  
JAMMU AND KASHMIR 
Shri Abdul Rashid Sheikh – Not present  
KERALA 
Shri Shashi Tharoor – Not present  
PUNJAB 
Shri Amritpal Singh – Not present  
WEST BENGAL 
Shri Sk Nurul Islam – Not present  
Shri Adhikari Deepak (Dev) (Ghatal) ̶ Oath - Bengali 
Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha – Not present. 
________
26.06.2024 8 11.03 hrs 
OBSERVATION BY THE SPEAKER PRO TEM 
Election of Speaker 
[English] 
HON. SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have received 16 notices of Motions  for Election of Speaker. All the Notices are in order. 
________
26.06.2024 9 
11.03½ hrs 
MOTION FOR ELECTION OF SPEAKER 
[English] 
HON. SPEAKER: Now, we will take up the Motions for Election of  Speaker of the Lok Sabha. I call upon the hon. Prime Minister, Shri  Narendra Modi to move the motion. 
[Translation] 
PRIME MINISTER (SHRI NARENDRA MODI): Sir, I beg to move: 
"That Shri Om Birla, a Member of this House, be chosen as the  Speaker of this House." 
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (SHRI RAJ NATH SINGH): Sir, I  second the motion. 
THE MINISTER OF PANCHAYATI RAJ; AND MINISTER OF  FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING (SHRI  RAJIV RANJAN SINGH ALIAS LALAN SINGH): Sir, I beg to  move: - 
"that Shri Om Birla, a Member of this House, be chosen as the  Speaker of this House." 
DR. RAJKUMAR SANGWAN (BAGHPAT): Sir, I second the motion. THE MINISTER OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM  ENTERPRISES (SHRI JITAN RAM MANJHI): Sir, I beg to move: 
"that Shri Om Birla, a Member of this House, be chosen as the  Speaker of this House."
26.06.2024 10 
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS  WELFARE; AND MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT (SHRI SHIVRAJ SINGH CHOUHAN): Sir, I second the motion. 
THE MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS; AND MINISTER OF  COOPERATION (SHRI AMIT SHAH): Sir, I beg to move: 
"that Shri Om Birla, a Member of this House, be chosen as the  Speaker of this House." 
THE MINISTER OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS  (SHRI NITIN JAIRAM GADKARI): Sir, I second the motion. 
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF THE MINISTRY OF AYUSH;  AND MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH  AND FAMILY WELFARE (SHRI PRATAPRAO GANPATRAO  JADHAV): Sir, I beg to move: 
"that Shri Om Birla, a Member of this House, be chosen as the  Speaker of this House." 
[English] 
SHRI SUNIL DATTATREY TATKARE (RAIGAD): Sir, I second the  motion. 
[Translation] 
THE MINISTER OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES (SHRI  CHIRAG PASWAN): Sir, I beg to move:
26.06.2024 11 
"that Shri Om Birla, a Member of this House, be chosen as the  Speaker of this House." 
[English] 
SHRI JOYANTA BASUMATARY (KOKRAJHAR): Sir, I second the  motion. 
THE MINISTER OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES; AND MINISTER OF  STEEL (SHRI H. D. KUMARASWAMY): Sir, I beg to move: "that Shri Om Birla, a Member of this House, be chosen as the  Speaker of this House." 
SHRI BALASHOWRY VALLABHANENI (MACHILIPATNAM): Sir, I second the motion. 
[Translation] 
THE MINISTER OF CIVIL AVIATION (SHRI KINJARAPU  RAMMOHAN NAIDU): Sir, I beg to move: 
"that Shri Om Birla, a Member of this House, be chosen as the Speaker  of this House." 
[English] 
SHRI LAVU SRIKRISHNA DEVARAYALU (NARASARAOPET): Sir, I second the motion. 
SHRI INDRA HANG SUBBA (SIKKIM): Sir, I beg to move: "that Shri Om Birla, a Member of this House, be chosen as the  Speaker of this House." 
SHRI PHANI BHUSAN CHOUDHURY (BARPETA): Sir, I second  the motion.
26.06.2024 12 
[Translation] 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH  AND FAMILY WELFARE; AND MINISTER OF STATE IN THE  MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (SHRIMATI  ANUPRIYA PATEL): Sir, I beg to move: 
"that Shri Om Birla, a Member of this House, be chosen as the Speaker  of this House." 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF  COOPERATION (SHRI KRISHAN PAL): Sir, I second the motion. [English] 
SHRI ARVIND GANPAT SAWANT (MUMBAI SOUTH): Sir, I beg  to move: 
“that Shri Kodikunnil Suresh, a Member of this House, be chosen  as the Speaker of this House.” 
SHRI N. K. PREMACHANDRAN (KOLLAM): Sir, I second the  motion. 
[Translation] 
SHRI ANAND BHADAURIA (DHAURAHRA): Sir, I beg to move: “that Shri Kodikunnil Suresh, a Member of this House, be chosen  as the Speaker of this House.” 
SHRI TARIQ ANWAR (KATIHAR): Sir, I second the motion. [English] 
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE (BARAMATI): Sir, I beg to move: “that Shri Kodikunnil Suresh, a Member of this House, be chosen  as the Speaker of this House.”
26.06.2024 13 
SHRIMATI KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI (THOOTHUKKUDI): Sir, I second the motion. 
[Translation] 
THE MINISTER OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR): Sir, I beg to move: 
"that Shri Om Birla, a Member of this House, be chosen as the  Speaker of this House." 
THE MINISTER OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS (SHRI JUAL ORAM): Sir,  I second the motion. 
[English] 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF FISHERIES,  ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING; AND MINISTER OF  STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ (PROF. S. P.  SINGH BAGHEL): Sir, I beg to move: 
"that Shri Om Birla, a Member of this House, be chosen as the  Speaker of this House." 
[Translation] 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (SHRI PANKAJ CHAUDHARY): Sir, I second the motion. THE MINISTER OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT (SHRIMATI ANNPURNA DEVI): Sir, I beg to move: 
"that Shri Om Birla, a Member of this House, be chosen as the  Speaker of this House." 
SHRIMATI KAMALJEET SEHRAWAT (WEST DELHI): Sir, I  second the motion.
26.06.2024 14 
[English] 
HON. SPEAKER: I now put the Motion moved by Shri Narendra Modi  and seconded by Shri Raj Nath Singh to the vote of the House. The question is: 
“That Shri Om Birla, a Member of this House, be chosen as  the Speaker of this House.” 
The motion was adopted. 
… (Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: The motion is carried and Shri Om Birla is declared  elected as the Speaker of this House.  
… (Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: Since the first Motion moved by Shri Narendra Modi  has been adopted, the Motions moved thereafter have become  infructuous. 
I invite Shri Om Birla to occupy the Chair. 
… (Interruptions) 
[Translation] 
THE MINISTER OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS; AND  MINISTER OF MINORITY AFFAIRS (SHRI KIREN RIJIJU): They have not made division force, therefore … (Interruptions) [English] 
HON. SPEAKER: We have already crossed that stage. I invite Shri Om Birla to come up and occupy the Chair.
26.06.2024 15 
(Shri Om Birla was conducted to the Chair by the Leader of the House,  Shri Narendra Modi; the Leader of the Opposition, Shri Rahul Gandhi;  and the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs and Minister of Minority  Affairs, Shri Kiren Rijiju.) 
11.15 hrs (Shri Om Birla, Hon. Speaker, in the Chair) ________
26.06.2024 16 
11.16 hrs 
COMPLIMENTS TO HON. SPEAKER PRO TEM 
[English] 
THE MINISTER OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS; AND  MINISTER OF MINORITY AFFAIRS (SHRI KIREN RIJIJU): Hon. Speaker, Sir, before the business could begin, I would like to thank  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, who has discharged his duties as Speaker Pro  Tem. He has completed entire proceedings of oath/affirmation very  smoothly within two days and till the election of the hon. Speaker this  morning. I profusely thank him on behalf of the Government and the hon.  Prime Minister also. 
I also thank the Panel of Chairpersons for their valuable  contribution. 
I also thank the Secretary General of Lok Sabha and staff of Lok  Sabha Secretariat who have completed the work within the time frame  under the guidance of the Speaker Pro Tem and the Panel of  Chairpersons. 
On behalf of the entire House, I thank all of them. 
Once again, I thank all the Members for their cooperation. ________
26.06.2024 17 
[Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister. 
… (Interruptions) 
11.17 hrs 
FELICITATIONS TO THE SPEAKER 
[Translation] 
THE PRIME MINISTER (SHRI NARENDRA MODI): Hon.  Speaker, this House is fortunate enough to have you in this Chair for the  second time…(Interruptions) I congratulate you and the entire House. …(Interruptions) 
 Hon. Speaker Sir, I extend my best wishes to you on my behalf as  well as on the behalf of the entire House. … (Interruptions). You have  been entrusted a very big responsibility of assuming this Ofice in this  momentous period of Amrit kaal. Your experience of 5 years as well as  our experience of five years under your chairmanship, we all believe that  you will guide us through the coming five years and also play a pivotal  role in this House to fulfill the hopes and aspirations of the country.  …(Interruptions) 
 Hon. Speaker Sir, as per our scriptures humility and diplomacy  make a person successful and keeps him calm and you have also been  gifted with a sweet smile. … (Interruptions) The pleasant smile on your  face also keeps the entire House vibrant. … (Interruptions) 
 I believe that you always set new standards and new records at  every step. We are seeing a new record being created by you by assuming  the office of the Speaker for the second time in the 18th Lok Sabha. Shri  Balram Jakhar ji was the first Speaker who had the distinction of holding 
26.06.2024 18 
the office of the Speaker again after completing a tenure of 5 years. After  him you have been given the opportunity to assuming the charge again  after completing 5 years’ term. The last two decades have been unique in  the sense that most of the Speakers have either not contested elections  after completing their term, or have not been elected to the House. You  can understand how difficult the Speaker's job is that it becomes difficult  for him to win the General Election again. You have won election another  time and this way you have created history. 
 Hon. Speaker Sir, most of our hon. MPs in this House are  familiar with you and are also familiar with your life. Last time I had said  many things about you in this House. I do not want to repeat those things  today, but as an MP and all of us as MPs, the way you work as an MP is  also worth knowing and there is a lot to learn. I am sure your style of  functioning as a Memeber will definitely inspire the MPs elected to the  House for the first time and our young MPs.  
 The commitment with which you have worked in your  parliamentary constituency in the Suposhit Maa Abhiyaan or well nourished mother campaign for healthy mother and healthy child, and the  way you have involved yourself by giving priority to this campaign, is  really inspiring. You have started ‘hospital on wheels’ in rural areas of  Kota which is also a great service to humanity in addition to the political  activities and this in itself, is helping to reach out to people in the rural  areas. You provide clothes, blankets, and depending upon the weather, if  required umbrellas, shoes etc. and many such facilities to the poor and the  poorest of the poor on regular basis, by looking for such persons and  ensure that it reaches them. You have taken it as a priority to encourage  the youth of your constituency in sports.
26.06.2024 19 
 In the 17th Lok Sabha, during your last tenure many historic  decisions were taken in the Parliament, a number of improvements were  made in your chairmanship, that was the golden period in the history of  Parliament, that in itself is the legacy of this House and also yours. In  future, when an analysis of the 17th Lok Sabha would be done it will be  recorded that the 17th Lok Sabha chaired by you had a very important  role in giving a new direction to the future of India.  
 Hon. Speaker Sir, in the 17th Lok Sabha, Nari Shakti Vandan Act,  2023, Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization Bill, Bhartiya Nyay Sanhita,  Bhatiya Sakshya Vidheyak, Bhartiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, Samajik  Suraksha Sanhita, Digital Personal Data Protection Bill, The Muslim  Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Bill, The Transgender Persons  (Protection Of Rights) Bill, Consumer Protection Bill, Direct Tax Vivaad  se Vishwas Bill etc., many such important historical legislations of social,  economic and national importance have been passed by this House having  you in the Chair in the 17th Lok Sabha and a strong foundation has been  laid for the country. The work which has not been done in 70 years of  independence, this House has done it under your chairmanship. 
 Hon. Speaker Sir, there are many stages in the odyssey of  democracy. There are some occasions when we get the chance of setting  records. I am confident that the country will be proud of the achievements  of the 17th Lok Sabha even today and in the future. Today, when every  effort is being made to modernize India to fulfill its aspirations, I believe  that the New Parliament Building will also work to script the future of the  Amrit Kaal and that too under your guidance. We all entered the New  Parliament Building under your leadership and you took many effective  and important decisions to make the parliamentary functioning system
26.06.2024 20 
effective and accountable, which has helped in strengthening democracy.  Today, in the Lok Sabha we are working through a paperless digital  system. It has been for the first time ever that you have made  arrangements to give a briefing to all the Hon. Members. This provided  necessary reference material to all the Hon. Members. Because of that,  the discussion in the House became more vigorous and this was a good  initiative of yours, which also created confidence among the MPs that  'yes, they can also say something, they can also give their arguments.' You  developed a good system. 
 Hon. Speaker Sir, G-20 is an important page of the success achieved  by India, but the less discussed topic in it is P-20. All the presiding  officers and Speakers of G-20 countries attended a conference under your  chairmanship and in all the P-20 conferences held so far, representatives  from most of the countries across the world came to India on your  invitation and some signiicant decisions were taken at the summit and it  played a major role in highlighting the glory and prestige of India's democracy in the world.  
 Hon. Speaker Sir, this House is not a mere building. Our Parliament  is the center of hope for 140 crore countrymen. The proceedings of  Parliament, responsibility and conduct further strengthen the loyalty that  our countrymen have towards democracy. Having you in the Chair, the  productivity of the Seventeenth Lok Sabha was 97%, the highest ever  over the last 25 years. For this all the hon. Members deserve thanks, but  you deserve special thanks. 
 In the difficult times like Corona, you personally talked to every MP  over phone and enquired about their health. If there was a news of any  MP's illness, you personally got concerned about him as the Speaker of 
26.06.2024 21 
the House. When I used to hear this from Members across the parties, I  felt very proud that you were personally concerned about every MP even during difficult times like Corona as the head of the family of this House.   Even during the Corona period, you did not let the functioning of  the House hamper. The Members also accepted your every suggestion  with due respect. When someone was asked to sit on the top, he went and  sat there, when someone was asked to go and sit at another place, he also  acceded to it, but no one let the country's work stop. The result of these  decisions that you took is that we were able to work even in that difficult  period. It is a pleasure that the House achieved 170 percent productivity  during the Corona period. This in itself is a very big news for the world. 
 Hon. Speaker Sir, we all want a code of conduct should be  followed in the House and the rules should be abided in the House. You  have taken decisions with great precision and sometimes even with  strictness. I know that you too feel aggrieved while embarking on such  decisions but notably, to you, the dignity of the House always took  precedence over personal grief and you tried to uphold the traditions of the House. Hon. Speaker Sir, you also deserve appreciation for this  courageous work.  
 Hon. Speaker Sir, I am confident that you will be successful in  your efforts and under your guidance, this eighteenth Lok Sabha will also  very successfully fulfill the dreams of the citizens of the country.  I once again convey my heartfelt wishes and congratulations to  you for this important responsibility and for presiding over this House  which will take the country to new heights of development.
26.06.2024 22 
[English] 
SHRI RAHUL GANDHI (RAEBARELI): Mr. Speaker Sir, I would  like to congratulate you on your successful election as the Speaker for the  second time. I would like to congratulate you on behalf of the entire  Opposition, on behalf of the INDIA Alliance. 
Mr. Speaker Sir, this House represents the voice of India’s people,  and you, the Speaker, are the final arbiter of their voice. Of course, the  Government has the political power but the Opposition also represents the  voice of India’s people. And this time, the Opposition represents  significantly more the voice of the Indian people than it did last time. 
Mr. Speaker Sir, the Opposition would like to assist you in doing  your work. We would like the House to function often and well. Mr. Speaker Sir, it is very important that cooperation happens on  the basis of trust. It is very important that the voice of the Opposition is  allowed to be represented in this House. I am confident that you will allow  us to represent our voice, allow us to speak, and allow us to represent the  voice of the people of India. 
Mr. Speaker Sir, the question is not how efficiently the House is run.  The question is how much of India’s voice is being allowed to be heard  in this House. So, the idea that you can run the House efficiently by  silencing the voice of the Opposition is a non-democratic idea. This  election has shown that the people of India expect the Opposition to  defend the Constitution, the Samvidhan, of this country. And we are  confident that by allowing the Opposition to speak, by allowing us to  represent the people of India, you will do your duty of defending the  Constitution of India.
26.06.2024 23 
I would like to once again congratulate you Mr. Speaker Sir, and  also, all the Members of this House, who have won in election. Thank you very much.
26.06.2024 24 [Translation] 
SHRI AKHILESH YADAV (KANNAUJ): I congratulate the newly  elected Speaker of Lok Sabha and convey my best wishes to him. While  the Prime Minister and our colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, have  congratulated you, I would also like to join them in congratulating you.  You have been re-elected as the Speaker of this House. You have had five  years of experience; you have had experience of the old as well as the new House. I congratulate you on my behalf and on the behalf of all the  Members of this House. The office being held by you has many glorious  traditions attached to it. We all believe that this will move forward without  any discrimination and as the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, you will give  equal opportunity and respect to every Member and every party. Impartiality is the key responsibility of this great office. You are sitting  like the Chief Justice of democratic justice. We all expect from you that  the voice of any public representative should not be suppressed nor should  any action like expulsion hurt the dignity of the House again. You have  control over the opposition, but you should also have control over the  ruling party.  
 Hon. Speaker Sir, the House should function as per your instructions,  this should not be reversed. We stand by your every just decision. I once  again congratulate you for occupying this position of Speaker. 
 I have come to this new House for the first time. I thought that the  Speaker's Chair would be very high, because the Chair of the House, I  have left is very high.… (Interruptions)
26.06.2024 25 
 Hon. Speaker Sir, who should I ask to make this Chair even  higher? I can see behind you that the stones have been placed properly in  this new House, everything looks good, but I can still see some cement in  that crack. 
 Hon. Speaker Sir, I hope that you will respect the opposition as  much as you respect the ruling party and will give us an opportunity to  present our views. I congratulate you and wish you all the best. We are  with you in every way. Thank you very much. 
HON. SPEAKER: Prof. Sougata Ray ji. 
… (Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay ji. 
[English] 
SHRI SUDIP BANDYOPADHYAY (KOLKATA UTTAR): Sir, I  congratulate you on your becoming Speaker of the House for the second  time. My first entry in this Parliament was in the 12th Lok Sabha. I have  gathered a long experience. 
What my impression is, if there is no Leader of the Opposition  officially the House does not run properly. We are glad that our country  has now got a Leader of the Opposition in the Parliament. 
Sir, the parliamentary democratic system, upon which we are the  firm believers, depends upon secularism, communal harmony and unity  of the country. It is my firm belief that somehow the floor of the House  always depends on the attitude of the Treasury Benches. So far as the  parliamentary democratic process is concerned, the House belongs to the  Opposition. This attitude is to be adopted by the ruling party itself.
26.06.2024 26 
Sir, you may have your good wishes and your good intention. But  sometimes, you are to bow down to the ruling party’s pressure. My  experience says this. Suspension of 150 MPs in one day has happened in  this House. It is not desirable. 
The hon. Prime Minister has mentioned about the introduction and  passing of so many Bills in the House. We appreciate that. But it has also  happened that so many Bills had been passed without any discussion. I  would humbly submit to you that let some positive decisions be taken so  that the Bills be tabled and discussed in a proper manner. We, from the  Opposition side, assure you that we will extend all sorts of cooperation so  that the House can run properly and smoothly. 
The Opposition has now got a better strength in this House. So, it  should not be the attitude of the Treasury Benches to neglect the  Opposition. I would request the hon. Prime Minister and the Treasury  Benches to come up and cooperate so that the House runs smoothly and  the country of 140 crores of people can actually get some guidance and  some hopes that Parliament can contribute for the welfare and benefit of  the country. 
This should be our motto. We want to see that the 18th Lok Sabha  runs smoothly and creates a history of reaching its target by running  smoothly in the interest of the nation while keeping secularism  and communal harmony intact. Our Constitution should be upheld  and the situation should never ever be allowed to be disturbed. Thank you,  Sir. 
26.06.2024 27 
SHRI T. R. BAALU (SRIPERUMBUDUR): Hon. Speaker, Sir, it is a  great occasion to felicitate you once again in this Parliament. On behalf  of my leader Dr. Thalapathy M.K. Stalin, an illustrious son of an  illustrious leader Dr. Kalaignar M. Karunanidhi, and on behalf of my  party and my party in Parliament, I wholeheartedly congratulate you on  this occasion. 
In fact, when you occupied the exalted Chair, I am overwhelmingly  enthused to appreciate and shower love and affection on you, Sir. You  might have been elected on the lotus symbol; the lotus always floats in  the water but it would not allow the water to stick. It is a natural  thing. Likewise, you might have been elected by my BJP friends but  hereafter there should be no politics between you and this House. You do not have any colour also. There is no colour at all. You have to treat the  Opposition as well as the Ruling Party in the same way. So, I would only  like to request you to be kindly impartial, impartial, and impartial. Thank  you.
26.06.2024 28 
SHRI LAVU SRIKRISHNA DEVARAYALU (NARASARAOPET): Sir, on behalf of the Telugu Desam Party, Chandrababu Naidu gaaru,  fellow Members of Lok Sabha, five crore people of Andhra Pradesh, and  on my own behalf, I congratulate you on being elected as the Speaker of  this House. 
It is a rare opportunity as a Speaker being elected and nominated for  the second term. There were five members before you, and two were  from Andhra Pradesh. They are, Neelam Sanjiva Reddy gaaru and  Balayogi ji gaaru. All these five members were nominated and elected  for two terms but somehow, they did not finish their five-year term but  you have this opportunity to complete this ten-year term.  
There were some coincidences between both of us, Sir, you being  the first-time Speaker of this House and me being the first-time Member  of this House in the 17th Lok Sabha. In the last five years, there were some  groundbreaking things that happened, starting from moving from the Old  Parliament Building to the New Parliament Building. There were new  Bills being passed starting with abrogation of Article 370, the Nari Shakti  Vandan Bill, the Triple Talaq Bill which empowered the women, and also  the IPC Bill. You have also encouraged the youth, the first-time Members,  who came to this House, to rise up and speak on various issues in Question  Hour. You have given us opportunities to ask supplementary questions,  and during the Zero Hour also you encouraged us to speak as much as  possible. Also, the digitalisation of the whole proceedings along with the  research facilities that are available in library has been vastly improved in  the last five years. I hope, it will continue in the next five years in your  second term.
26.06.2024 29 
With regard to the Question Hour, the vigour with which you used  to conduct it, you used to make sure that most of the Questions get  answered in this House. You used to tell the Ministers to be crisp and  answer in a pointed way. You also used to give the Members enough time  to ask their questions. I hope that tradition will continue. I also remember  that during the times of COVID when everyone was worried how this  House would function, you made sure that it proceeded in a safe  way. You had also ensured that most of the Members could express their  views and raise the problems of their States.  
So, I conclude by once again congratulating you, Sir, and wishing  you best of times in running the House. I assure you that the Telugu  Desam Party will support you in the smooth running of this House in the  next five years. 
Thank you very much.
26.06.2024 30 [Translation] 
SHRI RAJIV RANJAN SINGH ALIAS LALAN SINGH  (MUNGER): I heartily congratulate you on being elected as the Speaker  of the 18th Lok Sabha. We saw your working style as the Speaker of the  seventeenth Lok Sabha. You set a new record of parliamentary traditions  and democracy in the seventeenth Lok Sabha. You established high  democratic values during the 17th Lok Sabha. You gave opportunity to  the first time elected Members of Parliament to speak by running the House till midnight, and developed skills in them so that they could  participate in the proceedings of Parliament as an efficient MP. For  several days in Parliament, you gave the opportunity to speak to women  Members only during Zero Hour so that they could express their views,  it’s a record in itself. You set a record in the 17th Lok Sabha. You have  become the Speaker again, you will set new benchmarks in the record in  the 18th Lok Sabha too, with this hope and belief I conclude my speech  by congratulating you once again.  
SHRI ARVIND GANPAT SAWANT (MUMBAI SOUTH): Hon.  Speaker Sir, I congratulate you from the bottom of my heart. I have five  years’ experience to work with you in old House and in new House. You  have again been appointed to this seat of judgement, and I heartily  congratulate you. 
Hon. Prime Minister had said that some laws were passed, in that a  law regarding Election Commission was also passed, that law was passed  when we were suspended. In which there is a process of delivering justice,  we are the ones who make the law, when the same law is changed, then 
26.06.2024 31 
the question of Constitution comes up. INDIA Alliance was formed to  protect the Constitution. I expect from you, especially when the ruling  party speaks, the words should carry some meaning and similarly they  should also be dignified. Whatever promises we have made, should be  fulfilled. We have seen that even in the times of crisis, when we do not  get help from the Government, one feels quite bad. Now we all expect,  the term secular, the terms equality, freedom have been given by the  Constitution. I have one expectation, what we need is harmony and not  hatred. We want harmony, we do not want hatred. The walls we are  building should be broken in the name of humanity. If an accident  happens in Manipur and no tears are shed, one feels bad. Farmers die,  such a big movement takes place, yet no condolences are expressed.  Condolences should be expressed in this House, if they are not expressed, then it feels bad. The unemployed are roaming on the streets and even  then the House is unable to give them justice, then it feels bad. Farmers  are committing suicides but still the House is unable to give them justice. 
HON. SPEAKER: Speak these things on the President's address. 
SHRI ARVIND GANPAT SAWANT: I want that this time the House  should function keeping all these things in mind, our voice will reach you.  We expect that you will give us permission, this House must run, there  should be no second opinion about it. 
 This House should run and the common people should get justice,  this is what I expect. You are very experienced, so I expect that you will 
26.06.2024 32 
give us justice by showing sympathy and whenever we stand up to protect  the Constitution, you will support us. Jai Hind, Jai Maharashtra. 
[English] 
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE (BARAMATI): Sir, I take this  opportunity on behalf of the Nationalist Congress Party and the original  founder and our beloved leader Shri Sharad Pawar ji and all of us to  congratulate you on your second innings. I still remember the first day  when I met you with my colleague and friend Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy,  [Translation] That was the first time I met you. After this, ever since you  assumed this Office, you have always taken care of all of us. In the last  five years, the way you took care of the opposition along with the treasury  benches during Covid, you called each of our Members and enquired  about their well-being. The work done by your entire team during Covid,  the way the House was run, [English] I must take this opportunity to  congratulate the entire parliamentary staff and team who really supported  us in serving at that time. The entire transition from the old building to  the new building happened. A lot has been done in the last five years. 
[Translation] You have done excellent work in these five years. I  never go to the well, but a bad thing happened that 150 of our colleagues were suspended. We were very saddened by this. We will try that in the  next five years you do not even think about suspension, we can discuss,  we are always ready for a dialogue. We did very good work for five years  with Meghwal ji and Prahlad Joshi ji. My only request to the new  Members is that we all get elected here after working very hard, but when  it is lunch time in the noon, hard work has to be done from both sides for  completing the quorum. [English] So, it is a great opportunity.
26.06.2024 33 
I have been here a little more than most of you. I would like to  request each one of you very humbly that people really look up to us – and a very few of us are blessed to be here – that we convert this  opportunity into a great advantage for this nation, and deliver superior  results from here, whichever side we sit on. The common goal is to serve  the nation. 
If we all spend more time here together to deliberate more,  to argue more from both sides, that is to make sure that we serve  India and make it a good nation, a brighter nation, because India  is one of the largest democracies in the world, and any little thing  that happens here affects globally. And, democracy is looked as  a dark life. We did that mistake last time. I urge the hon. Treasury  Benches that we are here to work, we are here to serve, and I have  a hope that we have a much better and a warmer  relationship. [Translation] Running the House is not our  responsibility, it is the responsibility of the Treasury Benches. I  think that we all have a lot of expectations from the new Minister  who has come and has been our friend. Thank you very much.
26.06.2024 34 
SHRI SHRIRANG APPA CHANDU BARNE (MAVAL): Hon.  Speaker Sir, my party Shiv Sena, which works on the ideology of  Balasaheb Thackeray ji and is the party with the oldest alliance with the  Bharatiya Janata Party, is led by the Chief Minister of Maharashtra, hon.  Eknath Shinde ji. I would like to congratulate you on behalf of my party  Shiv Sena and Shinde sahab. 
 Every greeting in Hinduism begins with Om and Om is considered  auspicious. Your name also begins with Om. I wish you all the best. This  House is representing the world's largest democracy through 140 crore  people. I come from Maharashtra, the land of Chhatrapati Shivaji  Maharaj. The first Speaker of this House was from Maharashtra, Hon.  Ganesh Vasudev Mavalankar ji. 
12.00 hrs 
The second was hon. Manohar Joshi ji. Sumitra Mahajan ji and  Shivraj Patil ji from Maharashtra also served as Speaker. I got the  experience to work with Hon. Sumitra Mahajan in the 16th Lok Sabha  and to work with you in the 17th Lok Sabha. This House represents the  world's largest democratic country. I believe that the work done by you  as the Speaker of the Lok Sabha in the 17th Lok Sabha was the best work.  I also want to say that the work done by the hon. Prime Minister in the  last decade is commendable. 
Hon. Speaker Sir, you started with the organization. I also want to  tell you that whoever gets elected to the Parliament, reaches here by  facing great difficulties and working hard. You too have reached here by  working very hard. I am of the view that in the last 17th Parliament, you  gave the maximum number of chances to raise the issues to new MPs. 
26.06.2024 35 
This time 281 new MPs have got elected. You should run as many Zero  Hours as possible, so that everyone gets a chance and work can be done  with full confidence in the coming days. 
 I wish you all the best on behalf of my party, Shiv Sena. You are very  experienced and will work for uniting everyone. The area I come from is  the land of Jagat Guru Sant Tukaram Maharaj Ji. You work as hard as you  are soft. I want to recite some lines of Sant Tukaram Maharaj Ji in  Marathi. 
 *Sant Tukaram Maharaj has said, we Vishnu bhakts are very kind  and liberal, but when the time comes, we can also be as hard as a  thunderbolt. We are always ready to help good people and do not hesitate  to punish the bad people*. 
 Thank you, Jai Hind, Jai Bharat. 
[English] 
THE MINISTER OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES (SHRI  CHIRAG PASWAN): Hon. Speaker, Sir, thank you so much. First of  all, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you on behalf of  my party - Lok Janshakti Party (Ram Vilas). 
[Translation] Sir, we are delighted to see you in this Chair again.  You have again got this responsibility in the 18th Lok Sabha. We all have  our own experience of the 17th Lok Sabha. At that time, you encouraged  women, youth and those MPs who were elected for the first time. You  openly gave them chances to speak. This time, there are women and youth  in abundance in my party too. I hope that you will give them opportunities  
  
* …* Hindi translation of this part of the speech originally delivered in Marathi.
26.06.2024 36 
to express their views in the same way. Our party is moving forward  having the ideas of my father and leader hon. Ram Vilas Paswan ji. In the  last 5 years, you gave us the opportunity to present all these ideas in this  House. I have no hesitation in saying that the decisions taken by you in  the last 5 years have worked to increase the dignity of the Constitution  and strengthened democracy further. 
 Sir, we have reached here after winning the elections. I would like  to request all my colleagues that we have fought the elections wherever  we had to. Now it is the responsibility of all of us to put forward the issues  of our respective constituencies here and try to work here with the  responsibility of taking our country forward. Today we have stood up  only to congratulate you. Many times when the opposition says some  things, in this regard, I would request that when you point one finger at  someone, the other fingers also point towards you. When you expect good  conduct from the ruling party, we also expect the same from you. I have  examples of many states, which I do not want to quote, but when you talk  about the post of Speaker and the post of Deputy Speaker, there are many  states where your party has the post of Speaker and Deputy Speaker at the  same time, where no constituent party of the NDA is running the  Government and the opposition parties are running the Government. 
With the hope that in the next five years, we will continue to work  under your leadership and will get your guidance as beautifully as we got  in the last five years, I conclude. 
 I once again welcome you on behalf of my party, Lok Janshakti Party  (Ram Vilas). I congratulate you for the work done by you in the last five  years and wish you all the best for the coming five years. Thank you.
26.06.2024 37 [English] 
SHRI P. V. MIDHUN REDDY (RAJAMPET): Sir, thank you. I take this opportunity, on behalf of YSR Congress Party, to  congratulate you for being elected to this esteemed position. Sir, in your previous term you conducted yourself with a lot of  dignity, and I must really appreciate your dedication to uphold the values  of our democracy. We wish that even in this term it is marked with success  and you continue the same initiatives like you encouraged the newcomers  in the last term and you gave a fair chance to everybody in this House. We assure you our full cooperation. All the best for this tenure for  you. Thank you very much.
26.06.2024 38 [Translation] 
SHRI ABHAY KUMAR SINHA (AURANGABAD): Thank you Sir.  First of all, my salutations to you and the entire House. I thank and  congratulate you from the bottom of my heart on my own behalf and on  the behalf of my party Rashtriya Janata Dal on being re-elected as the  Speaker of the 18th Lok Sabha. I have hope and expectation from you. 
 Sir, I have been elected to the House for the first time. When you were  the Speaker of the 17th Lok Sabha, I used to see you on TV and today I have had the fortune of seeing you so closely. I have hope and expectation  from you that the new Members will definitely continue to receive your  patronage. 
 I once again congratulate you heartily. Thank you very much.
26.06.2024 39 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH  AND FAMILY WELFARE; AND MINISTER OF STATE IN THE  MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (SHRIMATI  ANUPRIYA PATEL): Hon. Speaker, first of all, on behalf of my party  'Apna Dal', I heartily congratulate you and wish you all the best for  occupying the Chair of Speaker of the 18th Lok Sabha for the second time  in a row. 
 Hon. Speaker, today seeing you occupying this Chair for the second  time in a row, I am reminded of a famous song from a film of 1963 named  'Bandini' - 
"O Jane Wale, Ho Sake to Laut Ke Aana, 
Ye Ghaat Tu Ye Baat Kahin Bhool Na Jana." 
 Seeing you here today, the relevance of this song seems even more. I  am remembering the last day of the 17th Lok Sabha, when we all bade you farewell with a heavy heart. But, by weaving it into our words, we  had put our feelings in front of you at that time - "O Jaane Wale, Ho Sake  to Laut Ke Aana" and you have returned. We all congratulate you very  much. We are delighted and proud to see you among us again on this  Chair. 
Hon. Speaker, out of the 18 Speakers before you, there have been  only five Speakers who got the opportunity to become the Speaker of the  Lok Sabha for the second time. M.A. Ayengar ji, Dr. Gurdayal Singh Dhillon ji, Dr. Neelam Sanjiva Reddy ji, Dr. Balram Jakhar ji and G.M.C.  Balayogi ji got this opportunity, but none of these Speakers completed the  tenure of 10 years.
26.06.2024 40  We are proud that you have been elected Speaker for the second time  in a row, who will set a record of completing the tenure of 10 years. This  will be a permanent legacy of yours in the history of Lok Sabha  Speakers.…(Interruptions) 
 Hon. Speaker Sir, we all Members represent only our constituencies  here, but you represent the ruling party and the opposition and this entire  House and along with the dignity of this House, you are also a symbol of  its strength. Your tenure in the 17th Lok Sabha has been full of many  achievements. 
Hon. Speaker Sir, you have carved your image as an impartial  Speaker and you have had many achievements in that tenure, which my  preceding speakers have also mentioned. I hope that during this tenure of  yours, new chapters of achievements will be added under your able  guidance. Under your guidance, we all, opposition and the ruling party  will get another golden opportunity to strengthen the democracy. Once  again, many congratulations and best wishes to you.
26.06.2024 41 
[English] 
SHRI E.T. MOHAMMED BASHEER (PONNANI): Sir, on behalf of  Indian Union Muslim League and myself, I wish to express my heartiest  congratulations to you on becoming the Speaker again. 
The position of the Speaker, of course, is a unique position. The  Speaker is a protector of the House and a guardian of the Members,  irrespective of caste, creed or any other divide. We have to ensure justice  by all means. Impartiality should be the mantra of this House. On various  past occasions, the Opposition was oppressed and depressed. We all know  that. That should not be repeated. The voice of the Opposition, as  correctly mentioned by the Leader of Opposition, Shri Rahul ji, should be  honoured by all means. 
Sir, I would like to say that we all should ensure justice, irrespective  of party. Whether it is a big party or a regional party, all of them should  be taken into proper consideration. 
This House has given a very good message, not only to India but to  the entire world. We hope that this House will again spread the message  of togetherness. Let the glory of the past be maintained and secular  democracy be preserved by all means. 
[Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: Hon. Members, one of our Members is speaking. … (Interruptions)
26.06.2024 42 [English] 
SHRIMATI HARSIMRAT KAUR BADAL (BATHINDA): Sir, on  behalf of my Party, Shiromani Akali Dal, I rise to congratulate you on  your successful election as Speaker for the second term. [Translation] 
 Sir, I am the only Member of a small regional party from a small state,  who has reached here for the fourth time. I stand in this House and worry  about this, where I have seen in the previous elections that there are many  parties which have big differences of opinion with each other in the state,  they fight, but they have compromised to reach here. 
HON. SPEAKER: You can make a speech like this on latter occasion. 
… (Interruptions) 
SHRIMATI HARSIMRAT KAUR BADAL: Sir, there are many  people who were on the other side for a long time, but now they have  come here for the sake of the Chair. What I mean to say is that when I am  here, the only woman Member of a regional party, I am worried that we  are neither on this side nor on that side, but when I stand here to raise the  voice of my Punjab and Punjabis, I expect from you that you will treat  alike the small parties, small communities, minorities, as you treat big parties. You will also protect us as well as give us a chance, you will keep  the 'principle of democracy' alive, a little more than you used to do earlier.  Whether it is a small party, or a single Member, but the fight is as tough  as it is for the big parties, maybe even more than that.…(Interruptions)
26.06.2024 43 
HON. SPEAKER: Have you not been given chance earlier? SHRIMATI HARSIMRAT KAUR BADAL: Sir, this time I am  requesting you to give me a little more chance than before, because being  a woman, I have come here for the fourth time, so please take care of us.  I wish you all the best and also hope for your protection and patronage.  Best wishes to you. 
*SHRI SUNIL DATTATREY TATKARE (RAIGAD): Hon. Speaker  Sir, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to speak in  Marathi. 
I would like to congratulate you on behalf of our original Nationalist  Congress Party of hon. Ajitdada Pawar. 
Hon. Speaker Sir, this 18th Lok Sabha has got a historical  importance. Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar ji had given us this Constitution.  In the year 1962, Shri Jawaharlal Nehru ji had become the Prime Minister  of India for the third time. 
Now, Shri Narendra Modi ji has also become the Prime Minister of  India for the third time, and we are very happy. You have also become  the Speaker of the House for the second consecutive term, and that is why,  I want to congratulate you. 
I belong to Raigad where Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj was  coronated, and today the 13th Scion of him is seating next to me in this  House. 
  
* English translation of the speech originally delivered in Marathi.
26.06.2024 44 
 You extended your co-operation for the last five years, when I used  to sit there on that side. I hope your kind support will continue to be given  this side also. 
I am sure we will get the opportunity to echo the voice of the people  of Maharashtra. 
I am quite hopeful that the Classical Language status would be  accorded to Marathi language during your second tenure. 
HON. SPEAKER: Hon. Members, several hon. Members want to  express their views, but there is a long list, so please express your views  during the President's address. I will give you all enough time, enough  opportunity. 
… (Interruptions) 
SHRI RAJESH RANJAN (PURNIA): Sir, at least single Members  should be given chance … (Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: You will be given opportunity. 
… (Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, hon. Members of the Union  Council of Ministers, leaders of all political parties, honourable Members,  I feel previleged to be the presiding officer of this august House… … (Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: Please, I will give chance to all of you. ….… (Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: Owaisi ji, please.  
… (Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: Please speak only for one minute each. 
26.06.2024 45 
… (Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: I will give chance to everyone. 
… (Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: Please conclude in one minute each. … (Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: You all please be seated. 
… (Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to inform all the hon. Members that when the Speaker stands up from his seat, you should all sit down. I am saying this for the first time today and should not be made  to say this in five years again. 
 Shri Asaduddin Owaisi. 
SHRI ASADUDDIN OWAISI (HYDERABAD): Sir, I congratulate  you on my behalf and on behalf of the entire nation and I am sure that the  Members of this Parliament are proud that you have become the Speaker  of this House for the second time.  
 Sir, you are the repository, the custodian of this House. But the  reality is that the party in majority has the numbers, but they do not have  the power of the majority. The opposition also has the voice of the  majority. Therefore, I request you to give a chance to the smaller parties  and I am sure that the way you showed kindness to me in the 17th Lok  Sabha, you will show kindness to us, to the smaller parties. I belong to a  community which is only four percent in the House, so please allow us to  raise our voice. In the end, I want to say that I am sure that when you are  sitting there, this House will shine like a precious diamond not only 
26.06.2024 46 
among the people of this country but also in the world and this  Government will reduce your burden by electing a Deputy Speaker. So  much burden should not be put on you.  
 Sir, I congratulate you. This is the House of the opposition and  small parties as well and you will give us a chance to raise our voice. The  character of this House has changed. Now BJP will not be able to  steamroll. We congratulate you again. Thank you Sir. 
]جناب اسدالدین اویسی )حیدرآباد(: ، سر، میں آپ کو اپنی جانِب سے پورے ملک کی جانِب سےمبارکباد دیتا ہوں اور مجھے یقین ہے کہ آپ کی پارلیمینٹ کی عوام اس بات پر فخر کر رہی ہے کہ آپ دوسری مرتبہ اس ایوان کے اسپیکر بنے ہیں۔ 
سر، آپ اس ہا ُوس کے رپوزیٹری ہیں، کسٹوڈین ہیں۔ مگر حقیقت یہ ہے کہ اکثریتی جماعت کے پاس نمبر ہے، مگر ان کے پاس اکثریت کی طاقت نہیں  ہے اپوزیشن کے پاس اکثریت کی آواز بھی ہے۔ اس لئے میری آپ سے ُگزارش ہے کہ آپ چھوٹی پارٹیوں کو موقع دیجیئے۔ اور مجھے یقین ہے کہ آپ 17 لوک  سبھا میں جس طرح سے شفقت کا نظارہ مجھ پر کیا ، ہم چھوٹی پارٹیوں پر کیا۔  میں اس طبقہ سے آتا ہوں جو ایوان میں صرف 4 فیصد ہیں۔ اس لئے ہمیں اپنی  آواز اُٹھانے کی اجازت دیجیئے گا۔ آخر میں، میں یہ کہنا چاہتا ہوں کہ مجھے  یقین ہے کہ آپ وہاں پر بیٹھے ہیں تو یہ ایوان ایک قیمتی ہیرے کی طرح نہ صرف اس ملک کی عوام میں بلکہ دنیا میں چمکے گا اور آپ کو بوجھ کو یہ سرکار ڈپٹی اسپیکر بنا کر کم کرے گی۔ اتنا بوجھ آپ پر نہیں ڈالنا چاہئیے۔
26.06.2024 47 
سر، میں آپ کو مبارکباد دیتا ہوں۔ یہ ایوان اپوزیشن اور چھوٹی پارٹیوں  کا بھی ہے اور ہم کو آپ آواز کا موقع دیں گے۔ اس ہا ُوس کا کیریکٹر بدل ُچکا ہے۔ اب بی۔جے۔پی۔ اسٹیم رول نہیں کر پائے گی۔ ہم آپ کو پھر سے مبارکباد دیتے ہیں۔۔ شکریہ۔[
26.06.2024 48 
[English] 
SHRI N.K. PREMACHANDRAN (KOLLAM): Thank you very much,  Speaker Sir. I, on behalf of my Party, Revolutionary Socialist Party,  extend hearty congratulations on your assuming the highest office of  democracy, that too in the largest democracy in the world. 
With your 30 years of experience in Parliament and the Legislature,  that is in the Rajasthan Legislative Assembly as well as three terms in the  Parliament and also five years as Speaker of this House, I firmly believe  that the expertise in leadership will give fruitful results to the 18th Lok  Sabha in running the House.  
I would like to make some quotations. Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru  referred to the Speaker as “the symbol of the nation's freedom and  liberty”. Kaul and Shakdher referred to the Speaker as “the conscience  and guardian of the House”. The Speaker is the soul and spirit of Indian  democracy and the custodian of the House. Further, I would like to say  that while the Government has its way in the House, it is incumbent upon  the Speaker to ensure that the Opposition has its full say. I would like to  urge upon the hon. Speaker Sir that the Opposition’s legitimate demands  and rights have to be protected so as to have a healthy democratic practice  in our country. The independence of the Parliament has to be protected at  any cost. We know that separation of powers – Judiciary, Executive and  Legislature – is the essential ingredient, the basic character of the  Constitution.  
I would like to give one historic example. In 1647, King Charles I  entered into the House of Commons and demanded relieving of five MPs  from the House as they were guilty of treason. The then Speaker of the  House of Commons, William Lenthall said and I quote: “May it please 
26.06.2024 49 
Your Majesty, I have neither eyes to see, nor tongue to speak in this place,  but as the House is pleased to direct me, whose servant I am here, and I  humbly beg Your Majesty’s pardon that I cannot give any other answer  than this to what Your Majesty is pleased to demand of me.” The  Speaker of the House in 1647 did not even succumb to the pressure of  King Charles I who had never cared about the Parliament. 
I hope and believe that your expertise and experience can bring back  the glory of our Parliament, the traditions and customs, and thereby  protect the independence of the Parliament. 
Once again, I extend my hearty congratulations on your assuming  the post of the Speaker after Balram Jakhar ji for consecutive two  terms. Thank you very much. 
[Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: Today is a good day for the House. Pappu ji, please  do not stand up again and again. You are a senior Member. Hon. Members, I would like to request everyone that today is a good day.  Please keep your points in brief. Whatever political points you have to  make, you will get enough time and enough opportunity for that in the  President's address. 
 Shri Amra Ram ji. 
26.06.2024 50 
SHRI AMRA RAM (SIKAR): Hon. Speaker, you have become the  Speaker of this august House for the second time. I express my heartfelt  gratitude to you on my behalf and on behalf of my party – Communist  Party of India (Marxist) and hope that occupying this seat of justice you  will definitely give your time to listen to the voice of the people from the  side of the opposition in this supreme House of this country. You had earlier raised the voice of people in the Legislative Assembly of Rajasthan  and now you are a Member of this House for the third time. You have  occupied the highest position in this House, so I once again express my  gratitude to you on behalf of myself and my party. 
 Thank you. Jai Hind. 
*DR. THOL THIRUMAAVALAVAN (CHIDAMBARAM): Hon.  Speaker Sir, Vanakkm. On behalf of Viduthalai Siruthaigal Party and on  behalf of the INDIA bloc, I extend my heartfelt congratulations to you,  Hon Speaker Sir, for having been elected to this exalted position for the  second consecutive term. There is a Sengol, the Sceptre on the right side  of your Chair. Sengol is a symbol of power stressing the need that you  should be impartial on your actions having a balanced approach. It stands  as a symbol for upholding justice. 
Sir, you have in the past proved to be an experienced and  distinguished Speaker of this august House. Everybody is aware of the  fact that you have taken ...** viewpoints with a ...** approach towards the  ruling and the opposition sides. As always, the ruling party is a stronger  
  
* English translation of the speech originally delivered in Tamil. 
** Expunged as ordered by the Chair.
26.06.2024 51 
one with lots of powers vested in it. This is the reason why the Opposition  leaders have demanded from you today to be impartial. Several Bills were  introduced by the ruling dispensation earlier. Hon Speaker Sir, only you  have the power to decide on whether a Bill is a money Bill or not. But the  ruling party of the previous term had misused this power. They may once  again try to do so. Therefore, you should not yield to such pressure from  the ruling side. I put before you as my submission that you should not  bend. 
Sir, by using the powers of the Lok Sabha Speaker, the statues of great leaders including Dr Bhimrao Ambedkar, Mahatma Gandhi and  Mahatma Jyotirao Phule were relocated to a less significant place inside  the Parliament House complex. I request you that those relocated statues  of our national leaders should be shifted to their original places of  installation. I once again congratulate you on your becoming the Lok  Sabha Speaker for the second term. Thank you. 
[Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: Dr. Raj Kumar Chabbewal ji. 
… (Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: Please do not advocate any Member. … (Interruptions)
26.06.2024 52 
*DR. RAJ KUMAR CHABBEWAL (HOSHIARPUR): Thank you,  Sir. I felicitate you on my behalf and on behalf of my party. People have  elected a strong opposition in this House. Sir, I am grateful and today, I  fondly remember ‘Bharat Ratna' Babasaheb Shri Bhimrao Ambedkar ji.  It is due to his efforts that today; we all are here in this august House. We  are because he was. Due to him, I have got this opportunity today to  represent the people of my constituency. 
Hon. Speaker Sir, it would have been better if the election of hon.  Speaker would not have taken place like this. The hon. Speaker should  have been elected unanimously and the hon. Deputy-Speaker should also  have been elected in a similar manner. If I remember, during the tenure  of late P.M., Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee ji, Shri G.M.C. Balyogi ji, who  was from the TDP, was the hon. Speaker. 
HON. SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please sit down.  
… (Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please sit down.  
… (Interruptions) 
DR. RAJ KUMAR CHABBEWAL: Sir, I would like to thank  you.…(Interruptions) Sir, I will conclude in one minute. 
HON. SPEAKER: Read the law, as to when the election for the post of  Deputy Speaker is held.  
  
* English translation of the speech originally delivered in Punjabi.
26.06.2024 53 
DR. RAJ KUMAR CHABBEWAL: Sir, whether it happens or not, he should have been elected, it would have been a big thing and people  would have congratulated you more. …(Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: Dr Rajkumar Sangwan ji.  
DR. RAJKUMAR SANGWAN (BAGHPAT): Sir, I heartily  congratulate you for being re-elected as the Speaker of the Lok Sabha. I  not only hope but have full faith that during your tenure there will be  positive discussions in the House for nation building and the country will  move forward on a new path of development. I assure that all the hon. Members of the House will cooperate in running this House smoothly  under your guidance. I once again congratulate you and wish you all the  best. 
HON. SPEAKER: Adv. Chandra Shekhar ji. 
ADV. CHANDRA SHEKHAR (NAGINA): Sir, the mike is not  working. 
HON. SPEAKER: Please wait for a second, the mike will start after a  second.  
ADV. CHANDRA SHEKHAR: Okay, Sir.  
 Sir, first of all I congratulate you that you have been elected to the  highest position in the Lok Sabha. Sir, many Hon. Members have praised  you. I have met you personally. When I faced a problem, you protected  me. Sir, our party is new. I am the free voice of my people. I appeal to 
26.06.2024 54 
you for protection. I hope that you will protect us. Sir, I also pray that you  are the protector of democracy. May Nature give you the strength to  protect democracy! Today is the birth anniversary of Chhatrapati Shahuji  Maharaj, the father of reservation. I congratulate the entire House on this  occasion. I request you that our people are in very bad condition there, if  we do not get a chance, we will not be able to present our views here, so  I appeal to you for protection. I once again congratulate you and all the  Hon. Members. Thank you. 
SHRI AGA SYED RUHULLAH MEHDI (SRINAGAR): Hon. Speaker Sir, I congratulate you on being elected as Speaker on behalf of  Jammu and Kashmir National Conference. I request you that from today  onward you are neither from BJP, nor from Congress, nor from  Samajwadi. From today onward you belong to only one party and that is  the Constitution of India. I expect that from today onward you will be its  custodian. This House is called the biggest institution of democracy, there  will be examples of democracy. In this House you will be remembered  for whether you forced the Treasury Benches to listen to the Opposition  or you silenced the Opposition. You will not be remembered for P-20.  You will be remembered for calling an hon. Muslim MP …*in this very  House because his being a Muslim. You will be remembered as to how  you silenced those voices, that illegitimate voice, or you allowed those  voices to be raised. If an Hon. MP who is an elected representative, if he  is called *… in this House, in this big institution of democracy, then those  Muslims can be called …* on the streets too. …(Interruptions) 
  
* Not recorded.
26.06.2024 55 
HON. SPEAKER: One minute, please, sit down. 
…(Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is the very First day of the House.  Please take care of what you are saying. First observe this term and then  comment. 
SHRI AGA SYED RUHULLAH MEHDI: I would like to request that  this is the biggest institution of democracy, such an example should not  have been set here and you were its custodian. When the Bill related to  Article 370 was brought in a minute and passed in half an  hour…(Interruptions) It was passed in half an hour…(Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: Please, be seated. 
…(Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: He does not have information. There was a  discussion for nine and a half hours on that. You sit down. …(Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: Hon. Member, sit down. 
… (Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: Adv. Francis George. 
… (Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please sit down. 
… (Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: Adv. Francis George ji, do you want to speak? You  please speak. 
… (Interruptions)
26.06.2024 56 [English] 
ADV. FRANCIS GEORGE (KOTTAYAM): Sir, on behalf of the  Kerala Congress Party, I join the hon. Prime Minister, the hon. Opposition  Leader and all the other leaders in congratulating you on assuming this  high post of Speaker of Lok Sabha. 
In fact, you have got re-elected. We are all happy about it. We have  a lot of issues to discuss in the coming days. The hon. Prime Minister said  that the last five-year period under you was a golden period. I do not know  how it was a golden period. Suspending of Members en masse and passing  the Bills without discussion took place in this period. How can we call it  a golden period? Unfortunately, it was not so. 
Due to paucity of time, I am not flagging many issues. We have a  lot of issues to discuss in the coming days. We have issues relating to the  farmers … (Interruptions) Sir, let me complete. I would like to tell you  one thing. There may be parties of one Member or two Members. Please  do not show a neglecting attitude towards us. We should also get time to  air our views … (Interruptions) 
[Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: You please sit down. 
… (Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni ji, you speak. … (Interruptions)
26.06.2024 57 
HON. SPEAKER: If you speak maintaining decorum, I will let you  speak. I will not give you a chance to speak indecently. The House will  not function like this.  
 Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni ji. 
26.06.2024 58 [English] 
SHRI BALASHOWRY VALLABHANENI (MACHILIPATNAM):  Sir, on behalf of my JanaSena Party President, Shri Pawan Kalyan Garu and on my own behalf, I express my heartfelt congratulations and best  
wishes to you on your election as Speaker of this prestigious House. Sir, I am confident; my Party is confident; the House and the 140  crore people of this country are confident that you will accomplish a great  deal as Speaker of this House. 
This is my third term as Member of this House. I am here because  of my leader, Shri Pawan Kalyan Garu. I sincerely thank and express my  gratitude to him for giving me this opportunity. 
Shri Pawan Kalyan Garu is a star in AP and as the hon. Prime  Minister rightly said during the NDA meeting in the Central Hall of  Samvidhan Sadan that “he is not wind but a storm” It is true. He is a  toofan in Andhra politics. Shri Pawan Kalyan Garu has made a record in  the history of independent India. JanaSena Party is the only party in the  county since Independence that got one hundred per cent strike rate both  in the Lok Sabha and in the Assembly elections… (Interruptions) The  JanaSena Party fought in 21 Assembly seats and two Lok Sabha  constituencies. It won in all the 21 Assembly seats … (Interruptions) 
[Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please sit down. 
 Shri Rajesh Ranjan ji. 
… (Interruptions)
26.06.2024 59 
HON. SPEAKER: Balashowry ji, please sit down. Nothing of your  speech is going into record. 
… (Interruptions) …* 
HON. SPEAKER: Shri Rajesh Ranjan ji, do you want to speak? … (Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: Balashowry ji, please sit down.  
… (Interruptions) 
SHRI RAJESH RANJAN (PURNIA): Hon. Speaker Sir, today you  have again come to the best and most glorious and dignified Chair like a  judge, as the guardian of all of us. You have come among us again as the  Speaker to maintain the self-respect, honour and pride of the country and  to maintain the autonomy of the Constitution. I congratulate you from the  depths of my heart. I will say just one line. I am the independent voice of  every society, class and community system of this country that is  protected. I will always expect that you will protect the Constitution as  well as independent voice along with Bihar. I will say just one line that I  am a fearless, independent person of this country who lives without fear. 
With strong leadership, this group, … (Interruptions) please listen  to me… (Interruptions) as an independent, fair and strong leader on the  path of truth, as India Alliance, the voice of the opposition of this country  within the strong leader of the opposition, hon. Rahul Gandhi ji and all  the leaders of the NDA constituents is only for the protection of its  democratic values. You are sitting on the best Chair of the values of  morality. We hope that you will not let the values of morality decline.  
  
* Not recorded.
26.06.2024 60 
You will protect the supreme Constitution of this country and you will  also protect all of us. 
 Thank you very much. 
SHRI RAJKUMAR ROAT (BANSWARA): Sir, many congratulations  to you for being elected on this post, many many salutations.   I am from Bharat Adivasi Party. My party, the entire tribal  community and every section of my constituency, especially the people  of Rajasthan are delighted at this development because they had hope,  Rajasthan was expecting to see you again as the Speaker of the Lok  Sabha. The people of the entire state are happy with this. I hope that our  regional party which has come to this House for the first time. I had seen  you when I was a Member of the Rajasthan Legislative Assembly. At that  time, I had wished that some day we would definitely go to Delhi and  today I got this opportunity. 
 I would like to once again thank my party and the people of my  constituency. On behalf of my party and the devotees of our Govind Guru  Maharaj, Sant Surmal Maharaj and Mavji Maharaj, I congratulate you  once again. 
 Thank you. Namaskar.
26.06.2024 61 
HON. SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, all the Hon. Members of the Council of Ministers, Leaders of all the political parties and Hon.  Members; 
 I express my deep sense of gratitude to all of you for giving me an  opportunity to carry out the responsibility of the Presiding Officer of this  august House.  
 I am thankful to the Hon. Prime Minister, Leaders of all the Political  Parties and the Hon. Members of Parliament who reposed their faith in  me.  
 Election to the 18th Lok Sabha was the festival of the largest  democracy of the world. I on behalf of this House express my gratitude  to the people of the country for the kind of gusto they have evinced and  the manner in which over 64 crore electorates actively took part in the  election and exercised their franchise despite geographical diversities,  adverse weather conditions and other challenges being in place.  
 I also thank the Election Commission for conducting the elections in such a fair, and transparent manner without courting any controversy  and making efforts to facilitate even a single electorate to exercise his/her  franchise in the far flung areas of the country.  
 Under the leadership of Hon. Prime Minister, NDA- led Govt has been  formed for the third consecutive time. Over the last decade, the  expectations, hopes and aspirations of the people have been on the rise.  Therefore, it is our duty to collectively fulfill all those expactations and  aspirations in an effective manner. 
 Hon. Members, the 18th Lok Sabha should be predominantly  characterized by our new visions and new resolutions. The 18th Lok Sabha  should be the House of our creative thinking and new ideas paving an 
26.06.2024 62 
elbow room for the evolution of Parliamentary traditions of the highest  order and for the graceful expression of consent and dissent from the  Treasury Benches and the Opposition. There should be meaningful  discussion and dialogue on the burning issues of the country and this  House should work with the will to fulfil the resolution of a developed  India. 
 Hon. Members, I also take this opportunity to recall my predecessor Presiding Officers, who, with their efficiency, tried their best to add  dignity to the efficacy, prestige, tradition and decorum of this House. I  
also had this distinction as the Presiding Officer for five years.   I tried to ensure that all the Members get enough time and  opportunity. During this time, the productivity of the House was also the highest and we also established a high standard of parliamentary  traditions and practices.  
I am happy to see that this time 281 Members have been elected for the  first time in the Lok Sabha. I compliment on behalf of the House.  
…(Interrruptions) 
I hope that the elected members will go through the rules, conventions  and prevalent practices of the House in great detail and take advantage of  the wealth of experience of their senior colleagues to follow good  parliamentary practices.  
 Hon. Members, many historic laws have also been passed in this New Parliament Building. Historical decisions have also been taken, for which  we had been waiting for years. The Nari Shakti Vandan Bill was passed  and they decided to involve themselves in leadership. Along with it many  issues were discussed and many other important Bills were also passed. 
26.06.2024 63 
 This year marks the 75th year of our journey towards the framing of  our Constitution. I salute all those scholars who played a role in framing  the Constitution, rising above party lines and personal ideologies and  framed a Constitution after thoroughly studying, debating and discussing  each and every point which serves as our guiding light even today.  
 I would like to urge all of you that in the 18th Lok Sabha too,  remembering those great architects of the Constitution, we should  formulate such policies and laws in the national interest and in the public  welfare, that the exploited, oppressed and deprived sections of the society  can be uplifted and socio-economic welfare can be brought in the life of  the most backward person.  
 I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Hon. Prime Minister,  under whose guidance the noble tradition of observing Constitution Day  started in this country. The Constitution was discussed, debated and at the  same time the Hon. Prime Minister started a 'Know Your Constitution'  drive through the Presiding Officers of all the States so that our young  generation knows the Constitution, understands the Constitution and contributes actively in the development of the country by discharging  constitutional obligations and duties.  
 It will be my endeavour to give enough time and enough opportunity  to all the hon. Members. This Parliament is the House where views of all  parties are considered. Views of all parties should be presented here.  Agreement and dissent are the strength of our democracy. We represent  different ideologies, but despite having different ideologies, we hold the  country as supreme. I hope that you will express your disagreement  strongly on the issues and ideology of your respective parties. Wherever  you give suggestions while discussing the Bill positively, my Government 
26.06.2024 64 
will also expect to incorporate those suggestions. Both the treasury  benches and the opposition are responsible for running the House. The  strength of India's democracy is that everyone is heard and the House runs  with everyone's consent. I would expect to run the House with the consent  of all. Even the party with a single Member will get enough time and  enough opportunity. I tried in the last tenure to give an opportunity to all  the hon. Members. Those hon. Members who did not want to speak were  also called with insistence and they put forth their views in the House. I  will try that your views/opinions come to the House with the same  feelings and I can run the House impartially, but I will expect that the  House should run smoothly. This will be my expectation from all of you.  We all come here after being elected and we come here with a lot of  expectations from the public. That is why I repeatedly request that there  should not be a deadlock in the House. There may be criticism, conveying  of views and expressions in the House, but deadlock is not the convention  of the House. Coming to the well is not the tradition of this House. You  have given me the responsibility to uphold parliamentary decorum and I  will abide by it. I never want to take any action against the hon. Members.  You too want that high standards and conventions of the House to be  upheld. For this, I have to make tough decisions. In this 18th Lok Sabha,  I would expect you all to hold a very healthy and a high standard dialogue  and discussion in the House according to the traditions of this House as  held in the past. There should be a distinction between raising protests in  Parliament and the one raised on the street. The people have elected us to  the Parliament. Therefore, I expect that we adopt methods of protest in  accordance with the decorum of the Parliament.
26.06.2024 65 
 I once again express my gratitude to all the hon. Members. I especially  request that all of you make collective efforts to enhance the glory of  democracy and this House. We will make optimum use of the opportunity  of public service that we have got. 
 I also thank our Hon'ble Protem Speaker, Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  ji, and the Members on the Panel of Chairmen Hon'ble Radha Mohan  Singh ji and Faggan Singh Kulaste ji for the smooth conduct of the  proceedings of the House during this interim period of the 18th Lok  Sabha.  
 I thank the Secretary-General of the Lok Sabha and all the staff of  the Secretariat for their dedicated service. 
 I hope that with the ideas you have expressed, we all together will  enhance the dignity and prestige of this House in this 18th Lok Sabha. Thank you. 
Jai Hind. 
____________
26.06.2024 66 
12.55 hrs 
INTRODUCTION OF MINISTERS 
[Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: Now the Hon. Prime Minister would introduce the  Council of Ministers. 
THE PRIME MINISTER (SHRI NARENDRA MODI): Sir, with your  permission, I would like to introduce you and through you, to this august  House the Members of the Council of Ministers. 
CABINET MINISTERS 
Shri Raj Nath Singh The Minister of Defence 
Shri Amit Shah The Minister of Home  Affairs; and Minister of  
Cooperation 
Shri Nitin Jairam Gadkari The Minister of Road  Transport and Highways  
Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda The Minister of Health and  Family Welfare; and Minister  
of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan The Minister of Agriculture  and Farmers Welfare; and  
Minister of Rural  
Development
26.06.2024 67 
Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman The Minister of Finance; and  Minister of Corporate Affairs 
Dr. Subrahmanyam Jaishankar The Minister of External  Affairs 
Shri Manohar Lal The Minister of Housing and  Urban Affairs; and Minister 
of Power 
Shri H. D. Kumaraswamy The Minister of Heavy  lndustries; and Minister of  
Steel 
Shri Piyush Goyal The Minister of Commerce  and Industry 
  
Shri Dharmendra Pradhan The Minister of Education  
Shri Jitan Ram Manjhi The Minister of Micro, Small  and Medium Enterprises 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh  alias 
Lalan Singh 
The Minister of Panchayati  Raj; and Minister of  Fisheries, Animal Husbandry  and Dairying
26.06.2024 68 
Shri Sarbananda Sonowal The Minister of Ports, Shipping and  Waterways 
Dr. Virendra Kumar The Minister of Social Justice and  Empowerment 
Shri Kinjarapu Rammohan Naidu 
The Minister of Civil Aviation 
Shri Pralhad Joshi The Minister of Consumer Affairs,  Food and Public Distribution; and 
Minister of New and Renewable  
Energy 
Shri Jual Oram The Minister of Tribal Affairs Shri Giriraj Singh The Minister of Textiles 
Shri Ashwini Vaishnaw The Minister of Railways;  Minister of lnformation and  
Broadcasting; and Minister of  
Electronics and lnformation  
Technology 
Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia The Minister of  Communications; and Minister  
of Development of North  
Eastern Region
26.06.2024 69 
Shri Bhupender Yadav The Minister of Environment,  Forest and Climate Change 
Shri Gajendra Singh Shekhawat The Minister of Culture; and Minister of Tourism 
Shrimati Annpurna Devi The Minister of Women and  Child Development 
Shri Kiren Rijiju The Minister of Parliamentary  Affairs; and Minister of  
Minority Affairs 
Shri Hardeep Singh Puri The Minister of Petroleum and  Natural Gas 
Dr. Mansukh Mandaviya The Minister of Labour and  Employment; and Minister of  
Youth Affairs and Sports 
Shri G. Kishan Reddy The Minister of Coal; and Minister of Mines 
Shri Chirag Paswan The Minister of Food  Processing lndustries 
Shri C. R. Patil The Minister of Jal Shakti
26.06.2024 70 MINISTERS OF STATE (INDEPENDENT CHARGE) 
Rao Inderjit Singh The Minister of State of the  Ministry of Statistics and  
Programme Implementation;  
Minister of State of the Ministry of  
Planning; and Minister of State in  
the Ministry of Culture 
Dr. Jitendra Singh The Minister of State of the  Ministry of Science and  
Technology; Minister of State of  
the Ministry of Earth Sciences;  
Minister of State in the Prime  
Minister's Office; Minister of State  
in the Ministry of Personnel, Public  
Grievances and Pensions; Minister  
of State in the Department of  
Atomic Energy; and Minister of  
State in the Department of Space 
13.00 hrs 
Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal The Minister of State of the  Ministry of Law and Justice; and  
Minister of State in the Ministry of  
Parliamentary Affairs  
Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao  Jadhav 
The Minister of State of the  Ministry of Ayush; and Minister of  State in the Ministry of Health and  Family Welfare
26.06.2024 71 
Shri Jayant Chaudhary The Minister of State of the  Ministry of Skill Development and  
Entrepreneurship; and Minister of  
State in the Ministry of Education
26.06.2024 72 MINISTERS OF STATE 
Shri Jitin Prasada The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Commerce and 
lndustry; and Minister of State in  
the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology 
Shri Shripad Yesso Naik The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Power; and Minister  
of State in the Ministry of New  
and Renewable Energy 
Shri Pankaj Chaudhary The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Finance 
Shri Krishan Pal The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Cooperation 
Shri Ramdas Athawale The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
Shri Ram Nath Thakur The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare 
Shri Nityanand Rai The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Home Affairs 
Shrimati Anupriya Patel The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare; and Minister of State in  
the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers
26.06.2024 73 
Shri V. Somanna The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Jal Shakti; and 
Minister of State in the Ministry  
of Railways 
Dr. Chandra Sekhar Pemmasani The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Rural Development; 
and Minister of State in the  
Ministry of Communications 
Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying; and 
Minister of State in the Ministry  
of Panchayati Raj 
Sushri Shobha Karandlaje The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises; and 
Minister of State in the Ministry  
of Labour and Employment. 
Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change; and 
Minister of State in the Ministry  
of External Affairs. 
Shri B. L. Verma The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution;  
and Minister of State in the  
Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment. 
Shri Shantanu Thakur The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways
26.06.2024 74 
Shri Suresh Gopi The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas; and Minister of  
State in the Ministry of Tourism. 
Dr. L. Murugan The Minister of State in the  Ministry of lnformation and 
Broadcasting; and Minister of  
State in the Ministry of  
Parliamentary Affairs. 
Shri Ajay Tamta The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways 
Shri Bandi Sanjay Kumar The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Home Affairs 
Shri Kamlesh Paswan The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Rural Development 
Shri Bhagirath Choudhary The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare 
Shri Satish Chandra Dubey The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Coal; and Minister  
of State in the Ministry of Mines 
Shri Sanjay Seth The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Defence 
Shri Ravneet Singh The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Food Processing 
lndustries; and Minister of State  
in the Ministry of Railways
26.06.2024 75 
Shri Durga Das Uikey The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
Shrimati Raksha Nikhil Khadse The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Youth Affairs and 
Sports 
Dr. Sukanta Majumdar The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Education; and 
Minister of State in the Ministry  
of Development of North  
Eastern Region 
Shrimati Savitri Thakur The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Women and Child 
Development 
Shri Tokhan Sahu The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs 
Dr. Raj Bhushan Choudhary The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Jal Shakti 
Shri Bhupathi Raju Srinivasa Varma 
The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Heavy lndustries; and Minister of State in the  Ministry of Steel 
Shri Harsh Malhotra The Minister of State in the Ministry of Corporate Affairs; 
and Minister of State in the  
Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways
26.06.2024 76 
Shrimati Nimuben Jayantibhai Bambhaniya 
The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
Shri Murlidhar Mohol The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Cooperation; and 
Minister of State in the Ministry  
of Civil Aviation 
Shri George Kurian The Minister of State in the  Ministry of Minority Affairs;  
and Minister of State in the  
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying 
Shri Pabitra Margherita The Minister of State in the  Ministry of External Affairs;  
and Minister of State in the  
Ministry of Textiles 
_________
26.06.2024 77 
13.06 hrs 
REFERENCE BY THE SPEAKER 
Proclamation of Emergency in the country on 25 June, 1975 [Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: This House strongly condemns the decision to impose  Emergency in the country in 1975.  
…(Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: At the same time, we appreciate the strong power of  all those who strongly resisted the Emergency, waged an unprecedented struggle and took responsibility to protect India's democracy.  …(Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: The day of June 25, 1975 will always be remembered  as a black chapter in the history of India. On this day, Emergency was  imposed in the country by then Prime Minister Shrimati Indira Gandhi  and the Constitution drafted by Baba Saheb Ambedkar was severely  attacked. India is known throughout the world as the 'mother of  democracy'. Democratic values and debate have always been promoted in  India, democratic values have always been protected, they have always  been encouraged. Dictatorship was imposed on such an India by Shrimati  Indira Gandhi. India's democratic values were trampled and freedom of  expression was stifled. 
…(Interruptions)
26.06.2024 78 
HON. SPEAKER: During the Emergency, the rights of the citizens of  India were snatched and freedom was taken away from the citizens. The  leaders of the Opposition were incarcerated and the entire country was  turned into a prison. The then dictatorial Government had imposed  several restrictions on the media and the independence of the judiciary  was curtailed. That period of Emergency was a 'period of injustice' in the  history of our country and it was a period characterized by darkness  prevailing all around. At that time, the Congress Government took many  decisions which served as a tool to crush the spirit of our Constitution.  The cruel law the Maintenance of Internal Security Act (MISA) was  amended by the Congress Party to ensure that our courts could not deliver  justice to those arrested under MISA. The Parliamentary Proceedings  (Protection of Publication) Repeal Act, the Press Council (Repeal) Act and the Prevention of Publication of Objectionable Matter Act were  brought to prevent the media from writing the truth.  
 It was during this dark period that the 38th, 39th, 40th, 41st, and 42nd  constitutional amendments were made in the Constitution. These  amendments by the Congress Government were aimed at bringing all  powers under the control of one person, having control over the judiciary 
and abolishing the basic principles of the Constitution. By doing this, the  rights of citizens were suppressed and the principles of democracy were  attacked. 
…(Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: Not only this, the then Prime Minister Shrimati Indira  Gandhi talked about committed bureaucracy and committed judiciary, 
26.06.2024 79 
which is an example of her anti-democratic attitude. Emergency brought  with it anti-social and dictatorial cruelty that ruined the lives of the poor, downtrodden and the deprived.  
…(Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: During the Emergency, people had to bear the onslaught of compulsory sterilization forcibly imposed by the Congress Government, the arbitrariness done on the pretext of removing  encroachments in cities and of the repercussions arising out of  Government's wrong policies. This House would like to express its  condolences to all those people. 
…(Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: The period from 1975 to 1977 is a period in itself  which reminds us of the principles of the Constitution, the federal  structure and the importance of the independence of Judiciary. This  period reminds us as how we all were attacked at that time and as to why  it is important to protect those principles. 
…(Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: At a time when we are entering the 50th year of  Emergency, this 18th Lok Sabha reiterates its commitment to preserve,  protect and safeguard the Constitution drafted under the chairmanship of  Babasaheb Ambedkar.  
…(Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: We are committed to keeping the principles of  democracy in India, preponderance of rule of law and decentralization of  powers in the country intact. We admire the unprecedented struggle and  faith of the people of India in constitutional institutions which led to the 
26.06.2024 80 
end of the Emergency and the establishment of rule of Constitution once  again. 
…(Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: It was on June 26, 1975, that the country faced the  brutal realities of the Emergency. On this day in 1975, the then Cabinet  had post-facto ratified the Emergency, approving this dictatorial and  unconstitutional decision. Therefore, in order to reiterate our commitment  to this second freedom won after countless sacrifices in our parliamentary  system, it is necessary to make this reference today.  
…(Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: We also believe that our young generation must know  about this dark chapter of democracy. During the Emergency, countless  people had to suffer due to illegal arrests and Government persecution. …(Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: Their families had to suffer immensely. Emergency  had destroyed the lives of so many citizens of India, so many people had  died. 
…(Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: We observe two minutes of silence in memory of  such dutiful and patriotic citizens of India who lost their lives at the hands  of the dictatorial Government of Congress, during that dark period of  Emergency. 
13.14 hrs 
The Members then stood in silence for a short while. 
…(Interruptions)