OBSERVATION BY THE SPEAKER 
Usage of Lok Sabha Chamber as Venue of the President’s Address  Relaxing Rule 384 
[Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you are aware, in accordance with  Article 87 of the Constitution of India, at the commencement of the first  Session after every General Election to the House of the People, the Hon.  President addresses both the Houses assembled together. In order to  enable all the Members of both the Houses to attend the President's  Address without any inconvenience, on behalf of the House, I agree with  the Motion to use this Chamber as the venue of the President's Address in  relaxation of Rule 384 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business  in the Lok Sabha. I hope the House agrees to it. 
SEVERAL HON. MEMBERS: Yes sir. 
_________
7 
12.39 hrs 
INTRODUCTION OF THE LEADER OF OPPOSITION 
[Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have to inform the House that in  accordance with the terms of Section 2 of the Salary and Allowances of  Leaders of Opposition in Parliament Act, 1977, I have recognised Shri  Rahul Gandhi, Leader of the Indian National Congress in Lok Sabha, as  the Leader of the Opposition in Lok Sabha from 9th June, 2024. I heartily  welcome and congratulate him. 
________ 
[Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: Secretary- General. 
… (Interruptions) 
12.39½ hrs 
MEMBER SWORN –contd. 
[English] 
SECRETARY GENERAL: Kerala - Shri Shashi Tharoor.  …(Interruptions) 
8 
[Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: There is a sanctity of swearing in, you are a senior  Member, please don’t speak anything. 
…(Interruptions) 
[English] 
KERALA  
Shri Shashi Tharoor (Thiruvananthapuram)  
[Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: You are just swearing in the name of Constitution. …(Interruptions) 
HON. SPEAKER: This is taking oath in the name of Constitution. …(Interruptions) 
SHRI DEEPENDER SINGH HOODA (ROHTAK): You should not  have objected to it.…(Interruptions)  
HON. SPEAKER: Please don’t give your advice on what should I object  to or and what to not. Please be seated.  
…(Interruptions) 
__________
9 
[Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: Secretary General. 
12.41 hrs 
PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS * 
[English] 
SECRETARY-GENERAL: Sir, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the  President’s Address (Hindi and English versions) to both the Houses of  Parliament assembled together on the 27th June, 2024.  
[Translation] 
**Hon. Members, I extend my heartiest congratulations and best wishes to  all the newly elected members of the 18th Lok Sabha. You all are here  after winning the trust of voters of the country. Very few get this privilege  to serve the nation and the people. I am confident that you will fulfill your  responsibilities in the spirit of Nation First and will be a medium to fulfill the aspirations of 140 crore Indians. I wish Shri Om Birla Ji the very best  
  
* Laid on the Table and also placed in Library, See No. LT 02/18/24. 
** Her Excellency Shrimati Droupadi Murmu, President of India, delivered the Address in Lok Sabha Chamber,  Parliament House of India (New building of Parliament) in Hindi and the English Text of the Address was read by  His Excellency, Shri Jagdeep Dhankhar, Vice President of India.
10 
for performing his exalted role as the Speaker of the Lok Sabha. He has  vast experience in public life. I am confident that he will be successful in  taking democratic traditions to new heights with his skills. 
 Hon. Members, I also express my gratitude to the Election  Commission of India on behalf of crores of Indians today. This was the  largest election in the world. About 64 crore voters performed their duty  with enthusiasm and zeal. Women cast their votes in huge numbers this  time also. A very heartening aspect of this election emerged from Jammu  and Kashmir. The Kashmir Valley broke all records of voter turnout of  many decades. In the last four decades, we had witnessed low voter  turnout amidst shut downs and strikes in Kashmir. Enemies of India  continued to spread false propaganda at global forums, projecting it as an  opinion of Jammu and Kashmir. But this time the Kashmir Valley has  given a befitting reply to every such element within the country and  outside. For the first time, the home voting facility was made available in  this Lok Sabha Election. I convey my appreciation for the work done by  all the personnel associated with the Lok Sabha elections and also extend  my congratulations to them. 
 Hon. Members, the whole world is talking about the Lok Sabha  Elections 2024.The world is witnessing that the people of India have  elected a stable Government with clear majority, consecutively for the  third term. This has happened after six decades. At a time when the  aspirations of people of India are at their highest level, people have 
11 
reposed faith in my Government for the third consecutive term. The  people of India have full faith that only my Government can fulfill their  aspirations. Therefore, this election of 2024 has been an election of trust  in policy, intention, dedication and decisions: 
Trust in a strong and decisive Government,  
Trust in good governance, stability and continuity,  
Trust in honesty and hard work,  
Trust in security and prosperity,  
Trust in Government’s guarantees and delivery 
Trust in India's resolve to be Viksit Bharat. 
It is a stamp of approval for my Government’s mission of service  and good governance undertaken in the past 10 years. It is a mandate that  the work of making India a developed nation continues uninterrupted and  India attains its goals. 
 Hon. Members, the 18th Lok Sabha is historic in many ways. This  Lok Sabha has been constituted in the early years of Amrit Kaal. This Lok  Sabha will also be witness to the 75th year of adoption of the Constitution  of India. I am confident that this Lok Sabha will script a new chapter on  decisions for public welfare. My Government will present its first budget  in the forthcoming session. This Budget will be an effective document of  the Government’s far reaching policies and futuristic vision. Along with  major economic and social decisions, many historic steps will also be seen  in this Budget. The pace of reforms will be further accelerated in tune with 
12 
the aspirations of people of India for rapid development. My Government  believes that there should be healthy competition among the states to  attract investors from all over the world. This is the true spirit of  competitive cooperative federalism. We will continue to move ahead with  the belief that the development of the country lies in the development of  the States. 
 Hon. Members, the resolve to Reform, Perform and Transform  has made India the fastest growing economy in the world today. In 10  years, India has risen to become the 5th largest economy from being the  11th ranked economy. From 2021 to 2024, India has grown at an average  rate of 8 percent annually. And this growth has not been achieved under  usual circumstances. In recent years, we have seen the biggest pandemic  in 100 years. India has achieved this growth amidst the global pandemic  and despite ongoing conflicts in different parts of the world. This has been  made possible due to reforms and major decisions undertaken in the  national interest in the last 10 years. Today, India alone is contributing 15  percent of the global growth. Now, my Government is striving to make  India the 3rd largest economy in the world. Achieving this goal will also  strengthen the foundation of a developed India. 
Hon. Members, my Government is giving equal importance to all  the three pillars of the economy – Manufacturing, Services and  Agriculture. PLI schemes and Ease of Doing Business have contributed  to increasing investments and employment opportunities on a large scale.
13 
Along with the traditional sectors, sunrise sectors are also being promoted  on mission mode. Be it semiconductor or solar, be it electric vehicles or  electronic goods, be it green hydrogen or batteries, be it aircraft carriers  or fighter Jets, India is expanding in all these sectors. My Government is  also making continuous efforts to reduce the cost of logistics. The  Government is also strengthening the services sector. Today, India is  emerging as a leader in every sector from IT to Tourism and from Health  to Wellness. And this is creating a large number of new opportunities for  employment and self-employment. 
 Hon. Members, in the last 10 years, my Government has placed  great emphasis on every aspect of rural economy. Agro-based industries,  dairy and fishery-based industries are being expanded in villages. In this  also, cooperatives have been accorded priority. The Government is  creating a large network of Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) and  cooperative organizations such as PACS.A major problem of small  farmers is related to storage. Therefore, my Government has commenced  work on a scheme to create the world’s largest storage capacity in the  cooperative sector. To enable farmers to meet their small expenses, more  than Rupees 3,20,000 crore have been disbursed to them under PM-Kisan Samman Nidhi. In the initial days of its new term, my Government has  transferred an amount of more than Rupees 20,000 crore to farmers. The  Government has also accorded a record increase in the MSP for Kharif  crops.
14 
 Hon. Members, today’s India is making changes in its agricultural  system in line with its current requirements. Policies have been framed  and decisions taken guided by the thought that we become more self reliant and increase farmers’ income through increased exports. For  example, the Government is providing all possible assistance to farmers  to reduce dependence on other countries for pulses and oilseeds. New  strategies are being formulated, keeping in mind the kind of food products  that are in high demand in the global market. Nowadays, the demand for  organic products is increasing rapidly in the world. Indian farmers have  ample capacity to meet this demand. Therefore, the Government is  strengthening natural farming and the supply chain of its related products. 
With these efforts, expenditure incurred by farmers on farming activities will reduce and their income will also increase further. 
Hon. Members, today’s India is known not for adding to the  challenges the world is facing, but for providing solutions to the world. As a Vishwa-Bandhu, India has taken initiatives in providing solutions to many global problems. We are providing various solutions for issues  ranging from climate change to food security and from nutrition to  sustainable agriculture. We are also running a campaign to popularise our  coarse grains – Shree Anna - as a super food, across the world. On India’s  initiative, the year 2023 was celebrated as International Year of Millets  across the world. You have also seen that International Yoga Day was  recently celebrated as a global event. The prestige of this great legacy of 
15 
India is continuously rising in the world. By promoting Yoga and Ayush,  India is helping in creating a healthy world. My Government has also  increased renewable energy capacities manifold. We are achieving our  climate related targets much ahead of schedule. Our initiatives towards  Net Zero are an inspiration for many countries. A record number of  countries have associated with us on our initiatives such as International  Solar Alliance. 
 Hon. Members, the future is going to be Harit Yug or Green Era. My Government is taking all necessary steps in this direction. We are  increasing investments in Green Industries, leading to increase in Green  Jobs. Be it Green Energy or Green Mobility, we are working with  ambitious goals on all fronts. My Government is also committed to  making our cities the best living spaces in the world. Living in cities which  are pollution free, clean and with amenities is the right of Indian citizens. 
Investments on an unprecedented scale have been made, particularly in small cities and towns, in last 10 years. India is the world’s third largest  domestic aviation market. In April 2014, India had only 209 airline routes. This number has increased to 605 by April 2024.This increase in the  aviation routes has directly benefitted Tier-2 andTier-3 cities. In 10 years,  Metro has reached 21 cities. Work is going on in many schemes such as  Vande Metro. My Government is working to make India’s public  transport system one of the best in the world.
16 
Hon. Members, my Government is working on those modern  parameters which will enable India to stand on an equal footing with  developed countries. In this direction, Infrastructure development has  emerged as the new face of a changing India. My Government has, in 10  years, constructed more than 3,80,000 kilometres of village roads under  the PM Gram Sadak Yojana. Today, we have an expanding network of  National Highways and Expressways in the country. The pace of  construction of National Highways has more than doubled. Work on the  High-Speed Rail Ecosystem between Ahmedabad and Mumbai is also  progressing at a rapid pace. My Government has decided to conduct  feasibility studies for bullet train corridors in the North, South and East of  the country. For the very first time, work on inland waterways has started on such a large scale. The North-East will benefit immensely from this  initiative. My Government has increased the allocation for the  development of the North-Eastern Region by more than four times, in the  last 10 years. The Government is working to make this region a strategic  gateway under its Act East Policy. Connectivity of all kinds is being  expanded in the North-East. Development works are being taken up in  every field including education, health, tourism and employment. A semi conductor plant is being established in Assam at a cost of Rupees 27,000  crore. The North-East will also be a hub of Made in India chips. My  Government is continuously working for lasting peace in the North-East. In the last ten years, many old disputes have been resolved, many
17 
important agreements have been signed. The work of withdrawing  AFSPA from the disturbed areas of the North-East is also underway in a  phased manner by accelerating development in those areas. These new  initiatives in every aspect of development in the country are heralding the  future of India. 
Hon. Members, my Government which is committed to women-led  development has started a new era of women empowerment. Women in  our country had been demanding greater representation in Lok Sabha and  Vidhan Sabha for a long time. Today, they stand empowered by the  enactment of Nari Shakti Vandan Adhiniyam. Over the past decade,  various Government schemes have led to greater economic empowerment  of women. As you are aware, during the last 10 years, majority of the 4  crore PM Awas houses have been allotted to women beneficiaries. Now,  at the very start of the third term of my Government, approval for construction of 3 crore new houses has been accorded. Most of these  houses will be allotted to women beneficiaries. Over the last 10 years, 10  crore women have been mobilized into Self Help Groups. My  Government has started a comprehensive campaign to make 3 crore 
women Lakhpati Didis. For this, financial support to the Self Help Groups  is also being increased. The endeavour of the Government is to improve  skills and sources of income, and enhance respect for women. The NAMO  Drone Didi Scheme is contributing towards achieving this goal. Under  this Scheme, women belonging to thousands of Self Help Groups are 
18 
being provided with drones and also being trained as Drone Pilots. My  Government has also recently started Krishi Sakhi Initiative. Under this  initiative, till date, 30 thousand women belonging to Self Help Groups  have been provided with Krishi Sakhi Certificates. Krishi Sakhis are being  trained in modern agricultural practices so that they can help farmers in  further modernization of Agriculture. 
 Hon. Members, the effort of my Government is also to maximise the  savings of women. We are well aware of the popularity of Sukanya Samriddhi Yojana under which a higher interest rate is being provided to  girls on their bank deposits. Women are also immensely benefitting from  the schemes providing free ration and affordable gas cylinders. Now my  Government has also brought a scheme to bring down the electricity bill  to zero and generate income by selling electricity. Solar panels are being  installed on the rooftops of houses under PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli 
Yojana. For this, my Government has been providing a support of upto  Rupees78,000 per family. More than 1 crore families have already been  registered under this scheme within a very short time. The electricity bill  of houses with rooftop solar installation has come down to zero. 
Hon. Members, achieving the goal of Viksit Bharat will be possible  only when the poor, youth, women and farmers of this country are  empowered. Therefore, top most priority is being accorded to these four  pillars in the schemes of my Government. Our effort is to ensure that the  benefit of every Government Scheme reaches them. This is the saturation 
19 
approach. When the Government works with the intention that not a single  person is left out of the Government schemes, it benefits everyone. It is  because of the implementation of Government Schemes with the saturation approach over the last 10 years that 25 crore Indians have been  brought out of poverty. This includes families of Scheduled Castes,  Scheduled Tribes, Backward Classes and all other social and regional  groups. In the last 10 years, focus on last mile delivery has changed the  lives of these sections. The change is more evident especially in the tribal  communities. A scheme like PM JANMAN with an allocation of more  than Rupees 24,000 crore is proving to be a means of development of the  most backward tribal communities. The Government is also providing  soft loans to the disadvantaged groups through PM-SURAJ portal for  making livelihood opportunities available. My Government is developing  affordable indigenous assistive devices for Divyang brothers and  sisters.PM Divyasha Kendras are also being expanded to all parts of the country. This commitment to serve the deprived is true Social Justice. 
 Hon. Members, as a mark of respect for the country’s labour force,  the welfare and empowerment of workers are my Government’s priority. My Government is integrating all the Social Security Schemes for workers. The coverage of accident and life insurance is being expanded  by leveraging the networks of Digital India and the Post Offices. The  scope of PM SVANidhi will be expanded and street vendors in rural and  semi-urban areas will also be brought under its ambit.
20 
Hon. Members, Baba Saheb Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar believed that  the progress of any society depends on the progress of the lower strata of  the society. Empowerment of the poor has been the foundation of the  achievements and progress of the nation in the last 10 years. For the first  time my Government has made the poor realise that the Government is at  their service. In the difficult times of the Corona pandemic, the  Government started PM Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana to provide free ration  to 80 crore persons. The benefit of this scheme is also being given to those  families who have come out of poverty, so that they do not slip back into  poverty. Swachh Bharat Mission has also made the dignity of the poor  and their health a matter of national significance. For the first time, toilets  were built for crores of poor people in the country. These efforts give us  the confidence that today the nation is following the ideals of Mahatma  Gandhi in the true spirit. My Government is providing free health services  to 55 crore beneficiaries under Ayushman Bharat Yojana. The opening of  25,000 Jan Aushadhi Kendras in the country is also progressing at a fast  pace. Further, the Government is going to take yet another decision in this area. Now all the elderly above 70 years of age will also be covered and  get benefit of free treatment under Ayushman Bharat Yojana. 
 Hon. Members, often, due to adversarial mindset and narrow  selfishness, the basic spirit of democracy has been greatly undermined. It  affects the parliamentary system as well as the developmental journey of the nation. During the phase of unstable governments in the country that 
21 
lasted several decades, many governments, even if willing, were neither  able to bring reforms nor take critical decisions. The people of India have  now changed this situation by their decisive mandate. Many such reforms  have taken place in the last 10 years which are greatly benefitting the  nation today. Even when these reforms were being taken up, they were  opposed and attempts were made to spread negativity. But all these  reforms have stood the test of time. Ten years ago, to save India's banking  sector from collapsing, the Government brought banking reforms and  made laws like IBC. Today, these reforms have made India's banking  sector one of the strongest banking sectors in the world. Our public sector  banks are robust and profitable today. Profits of public sector banks have  crossed Rupees 1.4 lakh crore in 2023-24 which is 35% higher than last  year. The strength of our banks enables them to expand their credit base  and contribute to the economic development of the nation. The NPAs of  Public Sector banks are also continuously decreasing. Today SBI is  earning record profits. Today LIC is stronger than ever. Today HAL is  also giving strength to the country's defence industry. Today, GST has  become a medium to formalise India's economy and is helping make  business and trade easier than before. For the first time, in the month of  April, GST collection has crossed Rupees 2 lakh crore. This has also  strengthened the states economically. Today, the entire world is excited  about Digital India and Digital Payments.
22 
Hon. Members, modernisation of our armed forces is essential for a  strong India. Reforms in our armed forces should be a continuous process  so that our forces maintain their supremacy during wars. Guided by this,  my Government has introduced many reforms in the defence sector in the  last 10 years. Reforms like CDS have given new strength to our defence  forces. My Government has taken many important steps to make the  defence sector self-reliant. The defence sector has greatly benefitted from  the reforms in ordnance factories. More than 40 Ordnance factories have  been restructured into 7 Defence Sector Enterprises, resulting in  improvement of their capacity and efficiency. It is due to such reforms  that India is now manufacturing defence equipment worth more than  Rupees 1 lakh crore. In the last decade, our defence exports have increased  more than 18times to the level of Rupees 21,000 crore. The BrahMos  Missile defence deal with the Philippines has strengthened India’s  standing in defence export sector. By providing encouragement to youth  and their startups, the Government has been able to lay down a strong  foundation for a self-reliant defence sector. My Government is also  developing two defence corridors, in Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. It is  a matter of joy for all of us that last year nearly 70 per cent of the total procurement of the defence forces has been sourced from Indian manufacturers only. Our defence forces have decided not to import over  500 defence items. All these arms and defence related equipments are  being procured only from Indian companies. My Government has always 
23 
given priority to the needs of the personnel in the armed forces. That is  why after 4 decades One Rank One Pension has been implemented. Under  this, Rupees 1,20,000 crore have been disbursed till date. In the honour of  our martyrs, the Government has also established the National War  Memorial at one end of Kartavya Path. These efforts are not only  salutations from a grateful nation for its brave soldiers but also a source  of constant inspiration of the ideal of Nation First. 
Hon. Members, my Government is involved in creating an enabling  environment for the youth of this country to dream big and realise those  dreams. In the last 10 years, every such obstacle which caused trouble to  our youth has been removed. In the past the youth had to run from pillar  to post in order to get their certificates attested. Now their self-attestation  is sufficient. Interviews for recruitment into Group-C and Group-D posts  of the Central Government have been abolished. Earlier, the students who  studied in Indian languages faced an unfair situation. With the  implementation of the new National Education Policy, my Government  has been able to remove this injustice. Now students can take up  engineering courses in Indian languages. In the past 10 years 7 new IITs,  16 IIITs, 7 IIMs, 15 new AIIMS, 315medical colleges and 390  universities have been established. It is the endeavour of the Government  to further strengthen these institutions and increase their numbers as per  requirement. The Government is working towards establishing a Digital  University as well. Programmes like Atal Tinkering Labs, Start-up India 
24 
and Stand-up India, have helped improve the capacity of youth of the  country. It is due to these efforts that today India has become the third  largest Start-up eco-system in the world. 
Hon. Members, it is the continuous endeavour of the Government to  provide right opportunities to the youth of the country to demonstrate their  talent. Whether it is competitive examinations or Government recruitment  there should be no reason for any hindrance. This process requires  complete transparency and probity. Regarding the recent instances of  paper leak in some examinations, my Government is committed to a fair  investigation and ensuring strict punishment to the culprits. Even earlier,  we have witnessed many instances of paper leaks indifferent States. It is  important that we rise above party-politics and undertake concrete measures nationwide. Parliament has also enacted a strict law against  unfair means in examinations. My Government is working towards major  reforms in examination related bodies, their functioning and all aspects of  the examination process. 
Hon. Members, for further increasing the participation of youth in  nation building, my Government has launched ‘Mera Yuva Bharat (MY  Bharat)' campaign. So far, more than 1.5 crore youth have registered for  it. This initiative will inculcate leadership skills and seed the spirit of  service among the youth. Today our youth is getting new opportunities to  move forward in sports as well. Due to effective efforts of my  Government, young Indian players are winning a record number of 
25 
medals at global platforms. The Paris Olympics is also going to start in a  few days. We are proud of every athlete representing India at the  Olympics. I convey my best wishes to them. To take these achievements  further, the Indian Olympic Association is also preparing to host the 2036  Olympic Games. 
 Hon. Members, the Bharatiya Nyay Sanhita will come into force  in the country from the first of July. During the British regime, there was  the mindset to punish the subjects. Unfortunately, the same penal system  of the colonial era continued for many decades after Independence. The  idea of changing this was much talked about for many decades, but it is  my Government which has shown the courage to do it. Now justice will  get priority over punishment, which also conforms to the spirit of our  Constitution. These new laws will speed up the judicial process. Today,  when the country is becoming free of the colonial mindset indifferent  aspects, this is a big step in that direction. It is also a real tribute to our  freedom fighters. My Government has started granting citizenship to  refugees under the CAA. It has ensured a dignified life to many families  who have suffered due to Partition. I wish a better future for the families  who have been granted citizenship under CAA. 
Hon. Members, while building the future, my Government is re establishing the splendour and heritage of Indian culture. Recently, a new  chapter has been added to it, in the form of the grand campus of Nalanda  University. Nalanda was not just a university, but a testimony to India's 
26 
glorious pastas a global knowledge hub. I am confident that the new  Nalanda University will help in making India a Global Knowledge Hub. It is the endeavour of my Government to continue to inspire the future generations with our legacy of thousands of years. That is why places of  pilgrimage and centres of faith and spirituality are being spruced up across  the country. 
 Hon. Members, my Government is working with the same pride  for heritage as it has been working for development. This resolve for pride  in heritage is becoming a symbol of honour for the Scheduled Castes,  Scheduled Tribes, the deprived and all communities. My Government  started celebrating the birth anniversary of Bhagwan Birsa Munda as Jan  Jatiya Gaurav Divas. The 150th birth anniversary of Bhagwan Birsa  Munda will be celebrated across the country next year with great  enthusiasm. The country is also celebrating the 500th birth anniversary of  Rani Durgavati on a large scale. Last month, the country has started the  year-long celebration to mark the 300th birth anniversary of Rani Ahilyabai Holkar. Earlier, the Government also celebrated the 550th  Prakash Parv of Guru Nanak Dev Ji and the 350th Prakash Parv of Guru  Gobind Singh Ji with great fervour. The tradition of celebrating festivals  like Kashi Tamil Sangamam and Saurashtra Tamil Sangamam in the spirit  of 'Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat' was also initiated by my Government. The  new generations get inspiration for nation building from these events, and  the sense of national pride is made stronger.
27 
 Hon. Members, our successes are our shared heritage. We should, therefore, take pride and not hesitate in embracing them. Today, India is performing well in various sectors. These achievements give us immense opportunities to make us feel proud of our progress and successes. We  
should feel proud when India performs well in digital payments globally.  We should feel proud when our scientists successfully land Chandrayaan  on the South Pole of the Moon. We should feel proud when India becomes  the fastest growing economy in the world. We should also feel proud  when India conducts such a large election exercise without any major  violence and disorder. Today, the whole world respects us as the Mother  of Democracy. The people of India have always demonstrated complete  trust in democracy and expressed full faith in the electoral institutions. We  need to preserve and protect this trust to sustain our robust democracy.  We must realise that hurting the faith of people in democratic institutions  and the electoral process is like cutting the very branch on which we all  are sitting. We should collectively denounce every attempt to undermine  the credibility of our democracy. We all remember those times when  ballot papers were snatched and looted. To ensure the sanctity of the  electoral process, it was decided to use EVMs. The EVM has passed every  test, from the Supreme Court to the people’s court, in the last few decades.  Hon. Members, I also want to share with you some of my  concerns. I would urge you to introspect on these issues and give concrete  and constructive solutions to the country. In this era of communication 
28 
revolution, disruptive forces are conspiring to weaken democracy and  create fissures in the society. These forces are present within the country  and are also operating from outside the country. These forces resort to  rumour mongering, misleading the people and misinformation. This  situation cannot be allowed to continue unchecked. Today, technology is  advancing every day. In such a situation, its misuse against humanity can  be extremely harmful. India has expressed these concerns at the international forums also and advocated for a global framework. It is our 
responsibility to stop this tendency and find new ways and means to  address this challenge. 
 Hon. Members, the global order is taking a new shape in this third decade of 21st century. Due to the efforts of my Government, Bharat is  giving anew confidence to the world as a Vishwa-Bandhu. Due to its  human-centric approach, India today is the first responder in any crisis and has become a strong voice of the Global South. India has been at the  forefront in safeguarding humanity; be it the Corona crisis or an  earthquake or a war. The way the world now views India was evident  during the G-7 summit held in Italy. India also brought the world together  on various issues during her G-20 presidency. It was during India's  presidency that the African Union was made a permanent member of the  G-20. This has strengthened the confidence of Africa and the entire Global South. Following the Neighborhood First Policy, India has strengthened  its relations with neighbouring countries. Participation of the leaders of 
29 
seven neighbouring countries in the swearing-in ceremony of the Union  Council of Ministers on June 9 reflects this priority of my Government.  India, in the spirit of Sabka Saath - Sabka Vikas, is also increasing  cooperation with the countries of the Indo-Pacific region. Be it East Asia  or Middle-East and Europe, my Government is giving great emphasis on  connectivity. It is India's vision that has given shape to the India Middle  East Europe Economic Corridor. This corridor will prove to be one of the  biggest game changers of 21st century. 
 Hon. Members, in a few months, India is going to complete 75 years as a Republic. The Constitution of India has stood up to every challenge  and every test in the past decades. Even when the Constitution was in the  making, there were forces in the world who wished India to fail. Even  after the Constitution came into force, it was attacked many times. Today  is 27th June. The imposition of Emergency on 25th June, 1975, was the  biggest and darkest chapter of direct attack on the Constitution. The entire  country felt outraged. But the country emerged victorious over such  unconstitutional forces as the traditions of the republic lie at the core of  India. My Government also does not consider the Constitution of India as  just a medium of governance; rather we are making efforts to ensure that  our Constitution becomes a part of public consciousness. With this very  objective in mind, my Government has started celebrating 26th November  as Constitution Day. Now the Constitution has also fully come into force 
30 
in that part of India, our Jammu and Kashmir, where the conditions were  different due to Article 370. 
 Hon. Members, achievements of the nation are determined by our sincerity in discharging our responsibilities. In the 18th Lok Sabha, many  new Members have become part of the parliamentary system for the first  time. Old members have also returned with new enthusiasm. You all know  that the present times are very favourable for India in every way. In the  coming years the decisions taken and policies framed by the Government  and the Parliament of India will be keenly watched by the whole world. It  is the responsibility of every Member of Parliament as well as of the  Government, to ensure the country gets utmost benefits during this  favourable period. With the reforms that have taken place in the last 10  years and the new confidence that has been infused in the country, we  have gained a new momentum to make India a developed nation. We all  need to always remember that making India a developed nation is the aspiration and resolve of every citizen of the country. All of us are  responsible for ensuring that no obstacles come in the way of achieving  this resolution. Opposition of policies and obstruction of parliamentary  functioning are two different things. When Parliament conducts its  business smoothly, when healthy deliberations take place here, when far reaching decisions are taken, then the people repose confidence not only  in the Government but also in the entire system. Therefore, I am confident 
31 
that every moment of Parliament will be fully utilised and public interest  will be given priority. 
Hon. Members, in our Vedas, our sages have inspired us with the message “Samano Mantrah Samitih Samani”. That is, we work  together with a common idea and goal. This is the very spirit of this  Parliament. Therefore, when India becomes the third largest economy,  you will also be partners in this achievement. When we celebrate the  hundredth anniversary of Independence in 2047 as a developed India, this  generation will also get credit. The potential that our youth have today,  The dedication we have in our resolutions today, Our seemingly  impossible achievements, All these testify that the era to come is the era  of India. This century is India's century, and its impact will last for a  thousand years to come. Let us all together, with full devotion to our  duties, get actively involved in fulfilling national resolutions and make  India a developed nation. 
Best wishes to all of you! 
Thank You, 
Jai Hind! 
Jai Bharat! 
_____________
32 
12.42 hrs 
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
Notices of Amendments to Motion of Thanks on President's Address 
[Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: As the hon. Members have already been informed by  Bulletin part-2 of the Lok Sabha dated 26th June, 2024, notices of  amendments to the Motion of Thanks on the Address of Her Excellency  the President may be given till 5:00 p.m. today.  
… (Interruptions) 
________
33 
[Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: Item No. 3. Secretary-General. 
12.44 hrs 
ASSENT TO BILLS 
[English] 
SECRETARY-GENERAL: Sir, I lay on the Table the following eight  Bills passed by the Houses of Parliament during the Fifteenth Session of  Seventeenth Lok Sabha and assented to by the President since a report  was last made to the House on the 2nd February, 2024:- 
i. The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Amendment Bill,  2024  
ii. The Constitution (Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) Orders  (Amendment)Bill, 2024  
iii. The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Amendment) Bill,  2024 
iv. The Finance Bill, 2024 
v. The Appropriation (Vote on Account) Bill, 2024  
vi. The Appropriation Bill, 2024  
vii. The Jammu and Kashmir Appropriation Bill, 2024  viii. The Jammu and Kashmir Appropriation (No.2) Bill, 2024 
34 
I also lay on the Table copies, duly authenticated by the Secretary General, Rajya Sabha of the following four Bills passed by the Houses of  Parliament and assented to by the President:- 
i. The Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair Means) Bill, 2024 ii. The Jammu and Kashmir Local Bodies Laws (Amendment) Bill,  2024  
iii. The Constitution (Jammu and Kashmir) Scheduled Tribes Order  (Amendment)Bill, 2024 
iv. The Constitution (Jammu and Kashmir) Scheduled Castes Order  (Amendment)Bill, 2024 
… (Interruptions) 
[Translation]  
HON. SPEAKER: The Cabinet is to be introduced in the Rajya Sabha,  so he has gone there. 
… (Interruptions)
35 
HON. SPEAKER: The House stands adjourned to meet again on Friday,  June 28, 2024 till Eleven of the Clock. 


_________
36
37