3.07.2024 4 
ANNOUNCEMENTS BY THE SPEAKER 
(i) Welcome of H.E. Dr. Tulia Ackson President of Inter-Parliamentary  Union (IPU) and Speaker of the National Assembly of the United Republic of Tanzania 
[Translation]  
HON. SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are immensely pleased to welcome Dr.  Tulia Ackson, the Hon. President of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) and  Speaker of the National Assembly of the United Republic of Tanzania. She is  on an official visit to India as our Guest of Honour. It is a matter of pleasure for  us that Dr. Ackson is in attendance here to witness the Budget session.  
 Hon. Dr. Tulia Ackson arrived in India on Friday, July 19, 2024. She  visited Agra on July 21, 2024 and is seated in the Special Box. We wish her a  happy and comfortable sojourn in India. We wish her every success in her role  as the President of the Inter-Parliamentary Union. Through her, we would like  to take an opportunity to extend our best wishes and compliments to the  Members of the Parliament of the Republic of Tanzania, the Government of  Tanzania as well as the friendly people there. 
_______
23.07.2024 5 
11.02 hrs 
(ii) Availability of Copies of Budget Speech on Member’s Portal [Translation]  
HON. SPEAKER: Hon'ble Members, as you have already been informed vide  Bulletin Part-II that the hard copies of the Budget Speech made by the Hon.  Minister of Finance will be made available. Therefore, hon. Members may  please collect their respective copies of the Budget speech from the  Publication Counter after the presentation of the Budget.  
 It is also brought to your notice that copies of the Budget will also be made  available to you through the Members’ Portal after the presentation of the  Budget by the Hon. Minister.  
_______ 
[Translation]  
HON. SPEAKER: Hon'ble Finance Minister Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman ji .
23.07.2024 6 
11.03 hrs 
UNION BUDGET–2024-2025* 
[English]  
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE; AND MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS  (SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN): Hon. Speaker, I present the Budget  for 2024-25. 
Introduction 
  
The people of India have reposed their faith in the government led by  the hon. Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi and re-elected it for a historic third  term under his leadership. We are grateful for their support, faith and trust in  our policies. We are determined to ensure that all Indians, regardless of  religion, caste, gender and age, make substantial progress in realising their life  goals and aspirations. 
Global Context 
The global economy, while performing better than expected, is still in the  grip of policy uncertainties. Elevated asset prices, political uncertainties and  shipping disruptions continue to pose significant downside risks for growth and  upside risks to inflation. 
 In this context, India’s economic growth continues to be the shining  exception and will remain so in the years ahead. India’s inflation continues to  be low, stable and moving towards the 4 per cent target. Core inflation, that is,  (non-food, non-fuel) currently is 3.1 per cent. Steps are being taken to ensure  supplies of perishable goods reach market adequately. 
Interim Budget 
  
* Placed inLibrary, See LT89/18/24
23.07.2024 7 
 As mentioned in the interim budget, we need to focus on four major  castes, namely ‘Garib’, ‘Mahilayen’, ‘Yuva’ and ‘Annadata’, that is, poor,  women, youth and farmer. For Annadata, we announced higher Minimum  Support Prices a month ago for all major crops, delivering on the promise of at  least a 50 per cent margin over costs. Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna  Yojana was extended for five years, benefitting more than 80 crore people. 
 Administrative actions for approval and implementation of various  schemes announced in the interim budget are well underway. The required  allocations have been made. 
Budget Theme 
 Turning attention to the full year and beyond, in this budget, we particularly  focus on employment, skilling, MSMEs, and the middle class. I am happy to  announce the Prime Minister’s package of five schemes and initiatives to  facilitate employment, skilling and other opportunities for 4.1 crore youth over a  five-year period with a central outlay of Rs. 2 lakh crore. I will speak about  them shortly, while more details may be seen in the annexure. This year, I  have made a provision of Rs. 1.48 lakh crore for education, employment and  skilling. 
Budget Priorities 
 The people have given a unique opportunity to our Government to take the  country on the path of strong development and all-round prosperity. In the  interim budget, we promised to present a detailed roadmap for our pursuit of  ‘Viksit Bharat’. In line with the strategy set out in the interim budget, this budget  envisages sustained efforts on the following nine priorities for generating  ample opportunities for all. 
1. Productivity and resilience in Agriculture
23.07.2024 8 
2. Employment & Skilling 
3. Inclusive Human Resource Development and Social Justice 4. Manufacturing & Services 
5. Urban Development 
6. Energy Security 
7. Infrastructure 
8. Innovation, Research & Development and 
9. Next Generation Reforms 
 Subsequent budgets will build on these, and add more priorities and  actions. A more detailed formulation will be carried out as part of the  ‘economic policy framework’ about which I will speak later in this speech. 
 This budget details some of the specific actions to be initiated in the  current year towards fulfilment of these priorities with potential for  transformative changes. The budget also covers some of the previously made  announcements with an intent to strengthen them and step up their  implementation for expediting our journey towards the goal of Viksit Bharat. 
Priority 1: Productivity and resilience in Agriculture 
Transforming agricultural research 
Our Government will undertake a comprehensive review of the agricultural research setup to bring the focus on raising productivity and developing  climate resilient varieties. Funding will be provided in challenge mode,  including to the private sector. Domain experts both from the government and  outside will oversee the conduct of such research.  
Release of new varieties
23.07.2024 9 
 New 109 high-yielding and climate-resilient varieties of 32 field and  horticultural crops will be released for cultivation by farmers. 
Natural Farming 
 In the next two years, 1 crore farmers across the country will be initiated  into natural farming supported by certification and branding. Implementation  will be through scientific institutions and willing gram panchayats. 10,000 need based bio-input resource centres will be established.  
Missions for pulses and oilseeds 
 For achieving self-sufficiency in pulses and oilseeds, we will strengthen  their production, storage and marketing. As announced in the interim budget, a  strategy is being put in place to achieve ‘atmanirbharta’ for oil seeds such as  mustard, groundnut, sesame, soybean, and sunflower.  
Vegetable production and Supply Chains 
 Large scale clusters for vegetable production will be developed closer to  major consumption centres. We will promote Farmer-Producer Organizations,  cooperatives and start-ups for vegetable supply chains including for collection,  storage, and marketing. 
Digital Public Infrastructure for Agriculture 
 Buoyed by the success of the pilot project, our government, in partnership  with the states, will facilitate the implementation of the Digital Public  Infrastructure (DPI) in agriculture for coverage of farmers and their lands in 3  years. During this year, digital crop survey for Kharif using the DPI will be  taken up in 400 districts. The details of 6 crore farmers and their lands will be 
23.07.2024 10 
brought into the farmer and land registries. Further, the issuance of Jan  Samarth based Kisan Credit Cards will be enabled in 5 states. 
Shrimp Production and Export 
 Financial support for setting up a network of Nucleus Breeding Centres for  Shrimp Broodstocks will be provided. Financing for shrimp farming, processing  and export will be facilitated through NABARD.  
National Cooperation Policy 
 Our Government will bring out a National Cooperation Policy for  systematic, orderly and all-round development of the cooperative sector. Fast tracking growth of rural economy and generation of employment opportunities  on a large scale will be the policy goal. 
 This year, I have made a provision of Rs. 1.52 lakh crore for agriculture  and allied sectors.  
Priority 2: Employment and Skilling 
Employment Linked Incentive 
Our Government will implement following 3 schemes for ‘Employment  Linked Incentive’, as part of the Prime Minister’s package. These will be based  on enrolment in the EPFO, and focus on recognition of first-time employees,  and support to employees and employers.  
Scheme A: First Timers 
This scheme will provide one-month wage to all persons newly entering  the workforce in all formal sectors. The direct benefit transfer of one-month  salary in three instalments to first-time employees, as registered in the EPFO, 
23.07.2024 11 
will be up to Rs. 15,000. The eligibility limit will be a salary of Rs. 1 lakh per  month. The scheme is expected to benefit 210 lakh youth. 
Scheme B: Job Creation in manufacturing 
This scheme will incentivize additional employment in the manufacturing  sector, linked to the employment of first-time employees. An incentive will be  provided at specified scale directly both to the employee and the employer with  respect to their EPFO contribution in the first four years of employment. The  scheme is expected to benefit 30 lakh youth entering employment, and their  employers. 
Scheme C: Support to employers 
This employer-focused scheme will cover additional employment in all  sectors. All additional employment within a salary of Rs. 1 lakh per month will  be counted. The government will reimburse to employers up to Rs. 3,000 per  month for two years towards their EPFO contribution for each additional  employee. The scheme is expected to incentivize additional employment of 50  lakh persons.  
Participation of women in the workforce 
We will facilitate higher participation of women in the workforce through  setting up of working women hostels in collaboration with industry, and  establishing creches. In addition, the partnership will seek to organize women specific skilling programmes, and promotion of market access for women SHG enterprises. 
Skilling programme
23.07.2024 12 
I am happy to announce a new centrally sponsored scheme, as the 4th scheme under the Prime Minister’s package, for skilling in collaboration with  State Governments and industry. 20 lakh youth will be skilled over a five-year  period. 1,000 Industrial Training Institutes will be upgraded in hub and spoke  arrangements with outcome orientation. Course content and design will be  aligned to the skill needs of industry, and new courses will be introduced for  emerging needs. 
Skilling Loans 
The Model Skill Loan Scheme will be revised to facilitate loans up to  Rs. 7.5 lakh with a guarantee from a Government promoted Fund. This  measure is expected to help 25,000 students every year. 
Education Loans 
For helping our youth who have not been eligible for any benefit under  Government schemes and policies, I am happy to announce a financial  support for loans upto Rs. 10 lakhs for higher education in domestic  institutions. E-vouchers for this purpose will be given directly to 1 lakh students  every year for annual interest subvention of 3 per cent of the loan amount. 
Priority 3: Inclusive Human Resource Development and Social Justice Saturation approach 
Our Government is committed to all-round, all-pervasive and all-inclusive  development of people, particularly, farmers, youth, women and poor. For  achieving social justice comprehensively, the saturation approach of covering 
23.07.2024 13 
all eligible people through various programmes including those for education  and health will be adopted to empower them by improving their capabilities. 
Implementation of schemes meant for supporting economic activities by  craftsmen, artisans, self-help groups, Scheduled Caste, Schedule Tribe and  women entrepreneurs, and street vendors, such as PM Vishwakarma, PM SVANidhi, National Livelihood Missions, and Stand-Up India will be stepped  up. 
Purvodaya 
The States in the Eastern part of the country are rich in endowments and  have strong cultural traditions. We will formulate a plan, Purvodaya, for the all round development of the eastern region of the country covering Bihar,  Jharkhand, West Bengal, Odisha and Andhra Pradesh. This will cover human  resource development, infrastructure, and generation of economic  opportunities to make the region an engine to attain Viksit Bharat. 
On the Amritsar Kolkata Industrial Corridor, we will support development  of an industrial node at Gaya. This corridor will catalyze industrial development  of the eastern region. The industrial node at Gaya will also be a good model for  developing our ancient centres of cultural importance into future centres of  modern economy. This model shall showcase “Vikas bhi Virasat bhi” in our  growth trajectory. 
We will also support development of road connectivity projects, namely  (1) Patna-Purnea Expressway, (2) Buxar-Bhagalpur Expressway, (3)  Bodhgaya, Rajgir, Vaishali and Darbhanga spurs, and (4) additional 2-lane  bridge over river Ganga at Buxar at a total cost of Rs. 26,000 crore. Power  projects, including setting up of a new 2400 MW power plant at Pirpainti, will  be taken up at a cost of Rs. 21,400 crore. New airports, medical colleges and  sports infrastructure in Bihar will be constructed. 
23.07.2024 14 
An additional allocation to support capital investments will be provided.  The requests of Bihar Government for external assistance from multilateral  development banks will be expedited. 
Andhra Pradesh Reorganization Act 
Our Government has made concerted efforts to fulfil the commitments in  the Andhra Pradesh Reorganization Act. Recognizing the State’s need for a  capital, we will facilitate special financial support through multilateral  development agencies. In the current financial year Rs. 15,000 crore will be  arranged, with additional amounts in future years. 
Our Government is fully committed to financing and early completion of  the Polavaram Irrigation Project, which is the lifeline for Andhra Pradesh and  its farmers. This will facilitate our country’s food security as well. …  (Interruptions) 
[Translation] 
HON SPEAKER: Hon'ble Members, please do not make comments from your  seats. 
……(Interruptions) 
[English] 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Hon. Speaker, Sir -- 
Under the Act, Andhra Pradesh Reorganization Act, for promoting  industrial development, funds will be provided for essential infrastructure  such as water, power, railways and roads in Kopparthy node on the  Vishakhapatnam-Chennai Industrial Corridor and Orvakal node on the
23.07.2024 15 
Hyderabad-Bengaluru Industrial Corridor. An additional allocation will be  provided this year towards capital investment for economic growth.  
Grants for backward regions of Rayalaseema, Prakasam and North Coastal  Andhra, as stated in the Act, will be provided. 
PM Awas Yojana 
 Three crore additional houses under the PM Awas Yojana in rural and urban  areas in the country have been announced, for which the necessary  allocations are being made.  
Women-led development 
 For promoting women-led development, the budget carries an allocation of  more than Rs.3 lakh crore for schemes benefitting women and girls. This  signals our government’s commitment for enhancing women’s role in economic  development.  
Pradhan Mantri Janjatiya Unnat Gram Abhiyan 
 For improving the socio-economic condition of tribal communities, we will  launch the Pradhan Mantri Janjatiya Unnat Gram Abhiyan by adopting  saturation coverage for tribal families in tribal-majority villages and aspirational  districts. This will cover 63,000 villages benefitting 5 crore tribal people. 
Bank branches in North-Eastern Region 
 More than 100 branches of India Post Payment Bank will be set up in  the North East region to expand the banking services. 
This year, I have made a provision of Rs. 2.66 lakh crore for rural  development including rural infrastructure.  
Priority 4: Manufacturing and Services
23.07.2024 16 
Support for promotion of MSMEs 
 This budget provides special attention to MSMEs and manufacturing,  particularly labour-intensive manufacturing. We have formulated a package  covering financing, regulatory changes and technology support for MSMEs to  help them grow and also compete globally, as mentioned in the interim budget.  I am happy to announce the following specific measures.  
Credit Guarantee Scheme for MSMEs in the Manufacturing Sector 
 For facilitating term loans to MSMEs for purchase of machinery and  equipment without collateral or third-party guarantee, a credit guarantee  scheme will be introduced. The scheme will operate on pooling of credit risks  of such MSMEs. A separately constituted self-financing guarantee fund will  provide, to each applicant, guarantee cover up to Rs.100 crore, while the loan  amount may be larger. The borrower will have to provide an upfront guarantee  fee and an annual guarantee fee on the reducing loan balance. 
New assessment model for MSME credit 
  
 Public sector banks will build their own in-house capability to assess  MSMEs for credit, instead of relying on external assessment. They will also  take a lead in developing or getting developed a new credit assessment model,  based on the scoring of digital footprints of the MSMEs in the economy. This is  expected to be a significant improvement over the traditional assessment of  credit eligibility based only on asset or turnover criteria. That will also cover  MSMEs without a formal accounting system.
23.07.2024 17 
Credit Support to MSMEs during Stress Period 
 I am happy to announce a new mechanism for facilitating continuation of  bank credit to MSMEs during their stress period. While being in the ‘special  mention account’ (SMA account) (SMA) stage for reasons beyond their  control, MSMEs need credit to continue their business and to avoid getting into  the NPA stage. Credit availability will be supported through a guarantee from a  government promoted fund.  
Mudra Loans 
 The limit of Mudra loans will be enhanced to Rs. 20 lakh from the current  Rs. 10 lakh for those entrepreneurs who have availed and successfully repaid  previous loans under the ‘Tarun’ category. 
Enhanced scope for mandatory onboarding in TReDS 
 For facilitating MSMEs to unlock their working capital by converting their  trade receivables into cash, I propose to reduce the turnover threshold of  buyers for mandatory onboarding on the TReDS platform from Rs. 500 crore to  Rs. 250 crore. This measure will bring 22 more CPSEs and 7000 more  companies onto the platform. Medium enterprises will also be included in the  scope of the suppliers. 
SIDBI branches in MSME clusters 
SIDBI will open new branches to expand its reach to serve all major  MSME clusters within 3 years, and provide direct credit to them. With the  opening of 24 such branches this year, the service coverage will expand to 168  out of 242 major clusters.  
MSME Units for Food Irradiation, Quality and Safety Testing
23.07.2024 18 
Financial support for setting up of 50 multi-product food irradiation units  in the MSME sector will be provided. Setting up of 100 food quality and safety  testing labs with NABL accreditation will be facilitated. 
E-Commerce Export Hubs 
To enable MSMEs and traditional artisans to sell their products in  international markets, E-Commerce Export Hubs will be set up in public private-partnership (PPP) mode. These hubs, under a seamless regulatory and  logistic framework, will facilitate trade and export related services under one  roof. 
Measures for promotion of Manufacturing and Services 
Internship in Top Companies 
As the 5th scheme under the Prime Minister’s package, our government  will launch a comprehensive scheme for providing internship opportunities in  500 top companies to 1 crore youth in 5 years. They will gain exposure for 12  months to real-life business environment, varied professions and employment  opportunities. An internship allowance of Rs. 5,000 per month along with a  one-time assistance of Rs. 6,000 will be provided. Companies will be expected  to bear the training cost and 10 per cent of the internship cost from their CSR  funds.  
Industrial Parks 
Our Government will facilitate development of investment-ready “plug  and play” industrial parks with complete infrastructure in or near 100 cities, in  partnership with the states and private sector, by better using town planning  schemes.  
 
23.07.2024 19 
 Twelve industrial parks under the National Industrial Corridor  Development Programme also will be sanctioned.…(interruptions) 
[Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: Two people, Saugata Roy ji and Dayanidhi Maran ji always  have problems.  
 ……(interruptions) 
[English] 
Rental Housing 
Rental housing with dormitory type accommodation for industrial workers  will be facilitated in PPP mode with VGF support and commitment from anchor  industries. 
Shipping industry 
Ownership, leasing and flagging reforms will be implemented to improve  the share of the Indian shipping industry and generate more employment. 
Critical Mineral Mission 
We will set up a Critical Mineral Mission for domestic production,  recycling of critical minerals, and overseas acquisition of critical mineral assets.  Its mandate will include technology development, skilled workforce, extended  producer responsibility framework, and a suitable financing mechanism. 
Offshore mining of minerals 
Our Government will launch the auction of the first tranche of offshore  blocks for mining, building on the exploration already carried out.  
Digital Public Infrastructure Applications
23.07.2024 20 
Turning to the services sector, I propose development of DPI  applications at population scale for productivity gains, business opportunities,  and innovation by the private sector. These are planned in the areas of credit,  e-commerce, education, health, law and justice, logistics, MSME, services  delivery, and urban governance. 
Integrated Technology Platform for IBC eco-system 
An Integrated Technology Platform will be set up for improving the  outcomes under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) for achieving  consistency, transparency, timely processing and better oversight for all  stakeholders. 
Voluntary closure of LLPs 
The services of the Centre for Processing Accelerated Corporate Exit  (C-PACE) will be extended for voluntary closure of LLPs to reduce the closure  time. 
National Company Law Tribunals 
The IBC has resolved more than 1,000 companies, resulting in direct  recovery of over 3.3 lakh crore to creditors. In addition, 28,000 cases involving  over 10 lakh crore have been disposed of, even prior to admission. 
Appropriate changes to the IBC, reforms and strengthening of the  tribunal and appellate tribunals will be initiated to speed up insolvency  resolution. Additional tribunals will be established. Out of those, some will be  notified to decide cases exclusively under the Companies Act.  
Debt Recovery
23.07.2024 21 
Steps for reforming and strengthening debt recovery tribunals will be  taken. Additional tribunals will be established to speed up recovery. 
Priority 5: Urban Development 
Cities as Growth Hubs 
Working with states, our Government will facilitate development of ‘Cities  as Growth Hubs’. This will be achieved through economic and transit planning,  and orderly development of peri-urban areas utilising town planning schemes. 
Creative redevelopment of cities 
For creative brownfield redevelopment of existing cities with a  transformative impact, our government will formulate a framework for enabling  policies, market-based mechanisms and regulation. 
Transit Oriented Development 
Transit Oriented Development plans for 14 large cities with a population  above 30 lakh will be formulated, along with an implementation and financing  strategy.  
Urban Housing 
Under the PM Awas Yojana Urban 2.0, housing needs of 1 crore urban  poor and middle-class families will be addressed with an investment of Rs. 10  lakh crore. This will include the central assistance of Rs. 2.2 lakhcrore  in thenext5 years. A provision of interest subsidy to facilitate loans at  affordable rates is also envisaged. 
In addition, enabling policies and regulations for efficient and transparent  rental housing markets with enhanced availability will also be put in place.
23.07.2024 22 
Water Supply and Sanitation 
In partnership with the State Governments and Multilateral Development  Banks, we will promote water supply, sewage treatment and solid waste  management projects and services for 100 large cities through bankable  projects. These projects will also envisage use of treated water for irrigation  and filling up of tanks in nearby areas.  
Street Markets 
Building on the success of PM SVANidhi Scheme in transforming the  lives of street vendors, our Government envisions a scheme to support each  year, over the next five years, the development of 100 weekly ‘haats’ or street  food hubs in select cities. 
Stamp Duty 
We will encourage States which continue to charge high stamp duty to  moderate the rates for all, and also consider further lowering duties for  properties purchased by women. This reform will be made an essential  component of urban development schemes. 
Priority 6: Energy Security 
Energy Transition 
  
 In the interim budget, I had announced our strategy to sustain high and  more resource-efficient economic growth, along with energy security in terms  of availability, accessibility and affordability. We will bring out a policy  document on appropriate energy transition pathways that balances the  imperatives of employment, growth and environmental sustainability. 
23.07.2024 23 
PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana 
In line with the announcement in the interim budget, PM Surya Ghar  Muft Bijli Yojana has been launched to install rooftop solar plants to enable 1  crore households obtain free electricity up to 300 units every month. The  scheme has generated remarkable response with more than 1.28 crore  registrations and 14 lakh applications, and we will further encourage it.  
Pumped Storage Policy 
A policy for promoting pumped storage projects will be brought out for  electricity storage and facilitating smooth integration of the growing share of  renewable energy with its variable & intermittent nature in the overall energy  mix. 
Research and development of small and modular nuclear reactors 
Nuclear energy is expected to form a very significant part of the energy  mix for Viksit Bharat. Towards that pursuit, our Government will partner with  the private sector for (1) setting up Bharat Small Reactors, (2) research &  development of Bharat Small Modular Reactor, and (3) research &  development of newer technologies for nuclear energy. The R&D funding  announced in the interim budget will be made available for this sector also. 
Advanced Ultra Super Critical Thermal Power Plants 
 The development of indigenous technology for Advanced Ultra Super  Critical (AUSC) thermal power plants with much higher efficiency has been  completed. A joint venture between NTPC and BHEL will set up a full scale  800 MW commercial plant using AUSC technology. The Government will  provide the required fiscal support. Moving forward, development of indigenous 
23.07.2024 24 
capacity for the production of high-grade steel and other advanced metallurgy  materials for these plants will result in strong spin-off benefits for the  economy. 
Roadmap for ‘hard to abate’ industries 
 A roadmap for moving the ‘hard to abate’ industries from ‘energy  efficiency’ targets to ‘emission targets’ will be formulated. Appropriate  regulations for transition of these industries from the current ‘Perform, Achieve  and Trade’ mode to ‘Indian Carbon Market’ mode will be put in place.  
Support to traditional micro and small industries 
 An investment-grade energy audit of traditional micro and small  industries in 60 clusters, including brass and ceramic, will be facilitated.  Financial support will be provided for shifting them to cleaner forms of energy  and implementation of energy efficiency measures. The scheme will be  replicated in another 100 clusters in the next phase. 
Priority 7: Infrastructure 
Infrastructure investment by Central Government 
 Significant investment the Central Government has made over the years in  building and improving infrastructure has had a strong multiplier effect on the  economy. We will endeavour to maintain strong fiscal support for infrastructure  over the next 5 years, in conjunction with imperatives of other priorities and  fiscal consolidation. This year, I have provided Rs. 11,11,111 crore for capital  expenditure. This would be 3.4 per cent of our GDP.
23.07.2024 25 
Infrastructure investment by State Governments 
 We will encourage States to provide support of similar scale for  infrastructure, subject to their development priorities. A provision of Rs. 1.5  lakh crore for long-term interest free loans has been made this year also to  support the States in their resource allocation. 
Private investment in infrastructure 
 Investment in infrastructure by private sector will be promoted through  viability gap funding and enabling policies and regulations. A market-based  financing framework will be brought out. 
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) 
 Phase IV of PMGSY will be launched to provide all-weather connectivity to  25,000 rural habitations which have become eligible in view of their population  increase. 
Irrigation and Flood Mitigation 
Bihar has frequently suffered from floods, many of them originating  outside the country. Plans to build flood control structures in Nepal are yet to  progress. Our Government, through the Accelerated Irrigation Benefit  Programme and other sources, will provide financial support for projects with  estimated cost of Rs. 11,500 crore such as the Kosi-Mechi Intra-State Link and  20 other ongoing and new schemes including barrages, river pollution  abatement and irrigation projects. In addition, survey and investigation of Kosi  related flood mitigation and irrigation projects will be undertaken.  
 Assam grapples with floods every year by the Brahmaputra River and its  tributaries, originating outside India. We will provide assistance to Assam for  flood management and related projects. … (Interruptions)
23.07.2024 26 
  
 Himachal Pradesh suffered extensive losses due to floods last year. Our  Government will provide assistance to the state for reconstruction and  rehabilitation through multilateral development assistance. … (Interruptions) 
 Uttarakhand too suffered losses due to cloud bursts and massive  landslides. We will provide assistance to the State. 
 Recently Sikkim witnessed devastating flash floods and landslides that  wreaked havoc across the State. Our Government will provide assistance to  the State. 
Tourism 
 Tourism has always been a part of our civilization. … (Interruptions) Our  efforts in positioning India as a global tourist destination will also create jobs,  stimulate investments and unlock economic opportunities for other sectors. …  (Interruptions) In addition to the measures outlined in the interim budget, I  propose the following measures. … (Interruptions)  
  
 Vishnupad Temple at Gaya and Mahabodhi Temple at Bodh Gaya in  Bihar are of immense spiritual significance. … (Interruptions) Comprehensive  development of Vishnupad Temple Corridor and Mahabodhi Temple Corridor  will be supported, modelled on the successful Kashi Vishwanath Temple  Corridor, to transform them into world class pilgrim and tourist destinations. …  (Interruptions) 
  
 Rajgir holds immense religious significance for Hindus, Buddhists and  Jains. The 20th Tirthankara Munisuvrata temple in the Jain Temple complex is  ancient. The Saptharishi or the 7 hotsprings form a warm water Brahmakund 
23.07.2024 27 
that is sacred. A comprehensive development initiative for Rajgir will be  undertaken. … (Interruptions)  
 Our Government will support the development of Nalanda as a tourist  centre besides reviving Nalanda University to its glorious stature. …  (Interruptions)  
 Odisha’s scenic beauty, temples, monuments, craftsmanship, wildlife  sanctuaries, natural landscapes and pristine beaches make it an ultimate  tourism destination. … (Interruptions) Our Government will provide assistance  for their development to Odisha as well. … (Interruptions) 
Priority 8: Innovation, Research and Development 
 We will operationalize the Anusandhan National Research Fund for basic  research and prototype development. Further, we will set up a mechanism for  spurring private sector-driven research and innovation at commercial scale  with a financing pool of Rs. 1 lakh crore in line with the announcement in the  interim budget. 
Space Economy 
 With our continued emphasis on expanding the space economy by 5 times  in the next 10 years, a venture capital fund of Rs.1,000 crore will be set up. 
Priority 9: Next Generation Reforms 
Economic Policy Framework 
 We will formulate an Economic Policy Framework to delineate the  overarching approach to economic development and set the scope of the next 
23.07.2024 28 
generation of reforms for facilitating employment opportunities and sustaining  high growth. 
 Our Government will initiate and incentivize reforms for (1) improving  productivity of factors of production, and (2) facilitating markets and sectors to  become more efficient. These reforms will cover all factors of production,  namely, land, labour, capital and entrepreneurship, and technology as an  enabler of improving total factor productivity and bridging inequality. 
  
 Effective implementation of several of these reforms requires collaboration  between the Centre and the States and building consensus, as development of  the country lies in development of the States. For promoting competitive  federalism and incentivizing States for faster implementation of reforms, I  propose to earmark a significant part of the 50-year interest-free loan. Working  with the States, we will initiate the following reforms.  
Land-related reforms by State Governments 
 Land-related reforms and actions, both in the rural and urban areas, will  cover (1) land administration, planning and management, and (2) urban  planning, usage and building bylaws. These will be incentivized for completion  within the next 3 years through appropriate fiscal support. 
Rural Land related actions 
 Rural land related actions will include (1) assignment of Unique Land Parcel  Identification Number (ULPIN) or Bhu-Aadhaar for all lands, (2) digitization of  cadastral maps, (3) survey of map sub-divisions as per current ownership, (4)  establishment of land registry, and (5) linking to the farmers registry. These  actions will also facilitate credit flow and other agricultural services.
23.07.2024 29 
Urban Land related actions 
 Land records in urban areas will be digitized with GIS mapping. An IT based  system for property record administration, updating, and tax administration will  be established. These will also facilitate improving the financial position of  urban local bodies.  
Labour related reforms 
Services to Labour 
 Our Government will facilitate the provision of a wide array of services to  labour, including those for employment and skilling. A comprehensive  integration of e-shram portal with other portals will facilitate such one-stop  solution. Open architecture databases for the rapidly changing labour market,  skill requirements and available job roles, and a mechanism to connect job aspirants with potential employers and skill providers will be covered in these  services. 
Shram Suvidha and Samadhan Portal 
 Shram Suvidha and Samadhan portals will be revamped to enhance ease  of compliance for industry and trade.  
Capital and entrepreneurship related reforms 
Financial sector vision and strategy 
 For meeting financing needs of the economy, our Government will bring  out a financial sector vision and strategy document to prepare the sector in  terms of size, capacity and skills. This will set the agenda for the next 5 years  and guide the work of the Government, regulators, financial institutions and  market participants. 
23.07.2024 30 
Taxonomy for climate finance 
 We will develop a taxonomy for climate finance for enhancing the  availability of capital for climate adaptation and mitigation. This will support  achievement of the country’s climate commitments and green transition. 
12.00 hrs 
Variable Capital Company structure 
 We will seek the required legislative approval for providing an efficient and  flexible mode for financing leasing of aircrafts and ships, and pooled funds of  private equity through a ‘variable company structure’.  
Foreign Direct Investment and Overseas Investment 
The rules and regulations for Foreign Direct Investment and Overseas  Investments will be simplified to (1) facilitate foreign direct investments, (2)  nudge prioritization, and (3) promote opportunities for using Indian Rupee as a  currency for overseas investments. 
NPS Vatsalya 
NPS-Vatsalya, a plan for contribution by parents and guardians for  minors will be started. On attaining the age of majority, the plan can be  converted seamlessly into a normal NPS account. 
Use of Technology 
We have successfully used technology for improving productivity and  bridging inequality in our economy during the past 10 years. Public investment  in digital infrastructure and innovations by the private sector have helped in  improving access of all citizens, particularly the common people, to market 
23.07.2024 31 
resources, education, health and services. We will step up adoption of  technology towards digitalization of the economy.  
Ease of Doing Business 
For enhancing ‘Ease of Doing Business’, we are already working on the  Jan Vishwas Bill 2.0. Further, States will be incentivized for implementation of  their Business Reforms Action Plans and digitalization. 
Data and Statistics 
For improving data governance, collection, processing and management  of data and statistics, different sectoral data bases, including those established  under the Digital India mission, will be utilized with active use of technology  tools.  
New Pension Scheme (NPS) 
The Committee to review the NPS has made considerable progress in  its work. I am happy that the Staff Side of the National Council of the Joint  Consultative Machinery for Central Government Employees has taken a  constructive approach. A solution will be evolved which addresses the relevant  issues while maintaining fiscal prudence to protect the common citizens. 
Budget Estimates 2024-25 
For the year 2024-25, the total receipts other than borrowings and the  total expenditure are estimated at Rs. 32.07 lakh crore and Rs. 48.21 lakh  crore respectively. The net tax receipts are estimated at Rs. 25.83 lakh crore.  The fiscal deficit is estimated at 4.9 per cent of GDP.
23.07.2024 32 
The gross and the net market borrowings through dated securities  during 2024-25 are estimated at Rs. 14.01 lakh crore and Rs. 11.63 lakh crore  respectively. Both will be less than that in 2023-24. 
The fiscal consolidation path announced by me in 2021 has served our  economy very well, and we aim to reach the deficit below 4.5 per cent next  year. The Government is committed to staying the course. From 2026-27  onwards, our endeavour will be to keep the fiscal deficit each year such that  the Central Government’s debt will be on a declining path as percentage of  GDP. 
I will, now, move to Part B.
23.07.2024 33 
PART B 
Indirect Taxes 
Sir, I start with GST. It has decreased tax incidence on the common  man; reduced compliance burden and logistics cost for trade and industry; and  enhanced revenues of the Central and State Governments. It is a success of  vast proportions. To multiply the benefits of GST, we will strive to further  simplify and rationalise the tax structure and endeavour to expand it to the  remaining sectors. 
My proposals for customs duties, intend to support domestic  manufacturing, deepen local value addition, promote export competitiveness,  and simplify taxation, while keeping the interest of the general public and  consumers surmount. 
 In Budget 2022-23, we reduced the number of customs duty rates.  I propose to undertake a comprehensive review of the rate structure over the  next six months to rationalise and simplify it for ease of trade, removal of duty  inversion and reduction of disputes. 
 I shall now take up sector specific customs duty proposals. 
Medicines and Medical Equipment 
 To provide relief to cancer patients, I propose to fully exempt three more  medicines from customs duties. 
 I also propose changes in the BCD on x-ray tubes & flat panel detectors  for use in medical x-ray machines under the Phased Manufacturing  Programme, so as to synchronise them with domestic capacity addition. 
Mobile Phone and Related Parts
23.07.2024 34 
 With a three-fold increase in domestic production and almost  100-fold jump in exports of mobile phones over the last six years, the Indian  mobile phone industry has matured. In the interest of consumers, I now  propose to reduce the BCD on mobile phone, mobile PCBA and mobile  charger to 15 per cent. 
Critical Minerals 
Minerals such as lithium, copper, cobalt and rare earth elements are  critical for sectors like nuclear energy, renewable energy, space, defence,  telecommunications, and high-tech electronics. I propose to fully exempt  customs duties on 25 critical minerals and reduce BCD on two of them. This  will provide a major fillip to the processing and refining of such minerals and  help secure their availability for these strategic and important sectors. 
Solar Energy 
 Energy transition is critical in the fight against climate change. To support  energy transition, I propose to expand the list of exempted capital goods for  use in the manufacture of solar cells and panels in the country. Further, in view  of sufficient domestic manufacturing capacity of solar glass and tinned copper  interconnect, I propose not to extend the exemption of customs duties provided  to them. 
Marine products 
 India’s seafood exports in the last financial year touched an all-time high of  more than Rs. 60,000 crore. Frozen shrimp accounted for about  two-thirds of these exports. To enhance their competitiveness, I propose to  reduce BCD on certain broodstock, polychaete worms, shrimp and fish feed to  five per cent. I also propose to exempt customs duty on various inputs for  manufacture of shrimp and fish feed.
23.07.2024 35 
Leather and Textile 
 Similarly, to enhance the competitiveness of exports in the leather and  textile sectors, I propose to reduce BCD on real down filling material from duck  or goose. I am also making additions to the list of exempted goods for  manufacture of leather and textile garments, footwear and other leather articles  for export. 
To rectify inversion in duty, I propose to reduce BCD, subject to  conditions, on methylene diphenyl diisocyanate (MDI) for manufacture of  spandex yarn from 7.5 to 5 per cent. 
 Furthermore, the export duty structure on raw hides, skin and leather is  proposed to be simplified and rationalized. 
Precious Metals 
 To enhance domestic value addition in gold and precious metal jewellery in  the country, I propose to reduce customs duties on gold and silver to 6 per  cent and that of platinum to 6.4 per cent. 
Other Metals 
 Steel and copper are important raw materials. To reduce their cost of  production, I propose to remove the BCD on ferro nickel and blister copper. I  am also continuing with nil BCD on ferrous scrap and nickel cathode and  concessional BCD of 2.5 per cent on copper scrap. 
Electronics
23.07.2024 36 
 To increase value addition in the domestic electronics industry,  I propose to remove the BCD, subject to conditions, on oxygen free copper for  manufacture of resistors. I also propose to exempt certain parts for  manufacture of connectors. 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
 To support existing and new capacities in the pipeline, I propose to  increase the BCD on ammonium nitrate from 7.5 to 10 per cent. 
Plastics 
 PVC flex banners are non-biodegradable and hazardous for environment  and health. To curb their imports, I propose to raise the BCD on them from 10  to 25 per cent. 
Telecommunication Equipment 
 To incentivize domestic manufacturing, I propose to increase the BCD  from 10 to 15 per cent on PCBA of specified telecom equipment. 
Trade facilitation 
 To promote domestic aviation and boat & ship MRO, I propose to extend  the period for export of goods imported for repairs from six months to one year.  I read that again. To promote domestic aviation and boat & ship  Maintenance, Repair and Operations, I propose to extend the period for  export of goods imported for repairs from six months to one year. In the  same vein, I propose to extend the time-limit for re-import of goods for repairs  under warranty from three to five years.
23.07.2024 37 
Direct Taxes 
We will continue our efforts to simplify taxes, improve tax payer services,  provide tax certainty and reduce litigation while enhancing revenues for  funding the development and welfare schemes of the government. 
 It has been our endeavour to simplify taxation. We have taken a number  of measures in the last few years including introduction of simplified tax  regimes without exemptions and deductions for corporate tax and for personal  income tax. This has been appreciated by tax payers. 58 per cent of corporate  tax came from the simplified tax regime in the financial year 2022-23. Similarly,  as per data available till now for the last fiscal, more than two-thirds have  availed the new personal income tax regime. 
Comprehensive Review of the Income-tax Act, 1961 
 I am now announcing a comprehensive review of the Income-tax Act, 1961.  The purpose is to make the Act concise, lucid, easy to read and understand.  This will reduce disputes and litigation, thereby providing tax certainty to the  tax payers. I will also bring down the demand embroiled in litigation. It is  proposed to be completed in six months. 
  
 A beginning is being made in the Finance Bill by simplifying the tax regime  for charities, TDS rate structures, provisions of reassessment and search  provisions and capital gains taxation. 
Simplification for Charities and of TDS 
 The two tax exemption regimes for charities are proposed to be merged  into one. The five per cent TDS rate on many payments is being merged into 
23.07.2024 38 
the two per cent TDS rate and the 20 per cent TDS rate on repurchase of units  by mutual funds or UTI is being withdrawn. TDS rate on e-commerce operators  is proposed to be reduced from one to 0.1 per cent. Moreover, credit of TCS is  proposed to be given in the TDS to be deducted on salary. Further, I propose  to decriminalize delay for payment of TDS up to the due date of filing  statement for the same. I also plan to provide a standard operating procedure  for TDS defaults and simplify and rationalise the compounding guidelines for  such defaults. 
Simplification of Reassessment 
 I propose to thoroughly simplify the provisions for reopening and  reassessment. An assessment hereinafter can be reopened beyond three  years from the end of the assessment year only if the escaped income is  Rs. 50 lakh or more, up to a maximum period of five years from the end of the  assessment year. Even in search cases, a time limit of six years before the  year of search, as against the existing time limit of ten years, is being  proposed. This will reduce tax-uncertainty and disputes. 
Simplification and Rationalisation of Capital Gains 
 Capital gains taxation is also proposed to be hugely simplified. 
 Short term gains on certain financial assets shall henceforth attract a tax  rate of 20 per cent, while that on all other financial assets and all  non-financial assets shall continue to attract the applicable tax rate. 
 Long term gains on all financial and non-financial assets, on the other  hand, will attract a tax rate of 12.5 per cent. For the benefit of the lower and  middle-income classes, I propose to increase the limit of exemption of capital  gains on certain financial assets to Rs. 1.25 lakh per year.
23.07.2024 39 
 Listed financial assets held for more than a year will be classified as long  term, while unlisted financial assets and all non-financial assets will have to be  held for at least two years to be classified as long-term. 
 Unlisted bonds and debentures, debt mutual funds and market linked  debentures, irrespective of holding period, however, will attract tax on capital  gains at applicable rates. 
Tax Payer Services 
 All the major tax payer services under GST and most services under  Customs and Income Tax have been digitalised. All remaining services of  Customs and Income Tax including rectification and order giving effect to  appellate orders shall be digitalized and made paper-less over the next two  years. 
Litigation and Appeals 
 While our concerted efforts to reduce pendency of appeals at various  appellate fora are beginning to show good results, it will continue to engage  our highest attention. 
 To dispose of the backlog of first appeals, I plan to deploy more officers to  hear and decide such appeals, especially those with large tax effect. 
 For resolution of certain income tax disputes pending in appeal, I am also  proposing Vivad Se Vishwas Scheme, 2024. 
 Further, I propose to increase monetary limits for filing appeals related to  direct taxes, excise and service tax in the Tax Tribunals, High Courts and  Supreme Court to Rs. 60 lakh, Rs. 2 crore and Rs. 5 crore respectively.
23.07.2024 40 
With a view to reduce litigation and provide certainty in international  taxation, we will expand the scope of safe harbour rules and make them more  attractive. We will also streamline the transfer pricing assessment procedure. 
Employment and Investment 
 I have a few proposals to promote investment and foster employment. 
First of all, to bolster the Indian start-up eco-system, boost the  entrepreneurial spirit and support innovation, I propose to abolish the so-called  angel tax for all classes of investors. 
 Second, there is tremendous potential for cruise tourism in India. To give  a fillip to this employment generating industry, I am proposing a simpler tax  regime for foreign shipping companies operating domestic cruises in the  country. 
 Third, India is a world leader in the diamond cutting and polishing  industry, which employs a large number of skilled workers. To further promote  the development of this sector, we would provide for safe harbour rates for  foreign mining companies selling raw diamonds in the country. 
 Fourth, to attract foreign capital for our development needs,  I propose to reduce the corporate tax rate on foreign companies from 40 to 35 per cent. 
Deepening the tax base 
 I have a couple of proposals for deepening the tax base. First, Security  Transactions Tax on futures and options of securities is proposed to be  increased to 0.02 per cent and 0.1 per cent respectively. Second, for reasons 
23.07.2024 41 
of equity, I propose to tax income received on buy back of shares in the hands  of the recipient. 
Others 
 To improve social security benefits, deduction of expenditure by employers  towards NPS is proposed to be increased from 10 to 14 per cent of the  employee’s salary. Similarly, deduction of this expenditure up to 14 per cent of  salary from the income of employees in private sector, public sector banks and  undertakings, opting for the new tax regime, is proposed to be provided. 
 Indian professionals working in multinationals get ESOPs and invest in  social security schemes and other movable assets abroad. Non-reporting of  such small foreign assets has penal consequences under the Black Money  Act. Such non-reporting of movable assets up to Rs. 20 lakh is proposed to be  de-penalised. 
Other major proposals in the Finance Bill relate to: 
∙ Withdrawal of equalization levy of 2 per cent; 
∙ Expansion of tax benefits to certain funds and entities in IFSCs; and 
∙ Immunity from penalty and prosecution to benamidar on full and true disclosure so as to improve conviction under the Benami Transactions  (Prohibition) Act, 1988. 
Personal Income Tax 
 Coming to Personal Income Tax Rates, I have two announcements to  make for those opting for the new tax regime. First, the standard deduction for  salaried employees is proposed to be increased from Rs. 50,000/-to  Rs.75,000/-. Similarly, deduction on family pension for pensioners is proposed  to be enhanced from Rs. 15,000/- to Rs. 25,000/-. This will provide relief to  about four crore salaried individuals and pensioners.
23.07.2024 42 
Second, in the new tax regime, the tax rate structure is proposed to be  revised, as follows: 
0-3 lakh rupees 
	Nil
	3-7 lakh rupees 
	5 per cent
	7-10 lakh rupees 
	10 per cent
	10-12 lakh rupees 
	15 per cent
	12-15 lakh rupees 
	20 per cent
	Above 15 lakh rupees 
	30 per cent
	



As a result of these changes, a salaried employee in the new tax regime  stands to save up to Rs. 17,500/- in income tax. 
 Apart from these, I am also making some other changes as given in the  annexure. 
  
 As a result of these proposals, revenue of about Rs. 37,000 crore – that  is Rs. 29,000 crore in direct taxes and Rs. 8,000 crore in indirect taxes – will  be forgone while revenue of about Rs. 30,000 crore rupees will be additionally  mobilized. Thus, the total revenue forgone is about Rs. 7,000 crore annually. 
 Mr. Speaker Sir, with this, I commend the budget to this august House. 
Jai Hind. 
________
23.07.2024 43 
12.26 hrs 
STATEMENTS RE: (i) MEDIUM-TERM FISCAL POLICY CUM FISCAL POLICY STRATEGY; AND 
 (ii) MACRO-ECONOMIC FRAMEWORK* 
[Translation] 
HON SPEAKER: Item No. 2, Hon'ble Finance Minister. 
[English] 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE; AND MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS  (SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN): Sir, with your permission, I rise to lay  on the Table the following Statements under section 3(1) of the Fiscal  Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act, 2003:- 
1. Medium-term Fiscal Policy cum Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement; and 2. Macro-economic Framework Statement. 
________ 
  
*Laid on the Table and also placed in the Library,See No. LT90/18/24
23.07.2024 44 
12.27 hrs 
FINANCE (NO. 2) BILL, 2024* 
[Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: Item No. 3, Hon. Finance Minister. 
[English] 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE AND MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS  (SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN): Sir, with your permission, I rise to  move for leave to introduce a Bill to give effect to the financial proposals of the  Central Government for the financial year 2024-2025. 
[Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: The question is: 
"That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to give effect to the  financial proposals of the Central Government for the financial year 2024-2025.” 
 The motion was adopted. 
[English] 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, I introduce**the Bill. [Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: The Finance Bill, 2024 has been introduced. 
  
* Published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part-II, Section-2 dated 23.07.2024. 
**Introduced with the recommendation of the President.
23.07.2024 45 12.27½ hrs 
UNION TERRITORY OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR BUDGET-2024-2025* 
[Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: Item No. 4, Hon'ble Finance Minister. 
[English] 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE AND MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS  (SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN): Sir, I rise to present a statement  (Hindi and English versions) of estimated receipts and expenditure of the  Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir for the year 2024-25. 
[Translation] 
HON. SPEAKER: The House stands adjourned to meet again on Wednesday,  the 24th July, 2024 at 11 a.m. 
12.28 hrs 
The Lok Sabha then adjourned till Eleven of the Clock 
on Wednesday, July 24, 2024/Sravana 2, 1946 (Saka). 
________